Unit 1- Geography

Human Geography
Human geography is all about how the people and the land connect together into one world. The different areas of the world all bring their own uniqueness to the table. With different resources, landscapes, and culture the individual regions create a sense of originality. Human Geography is also the study the people&#39;s and resources&#39; spatial organization. These places are very dynamic with changing land features and political boundaries. These changes may be caused by the residents or the environment. A region&#39;s values, attitudes, and behaviors may rub off on other regions. These changes on the other cultures could be positive or negative. Places can also exhibit a symbolic presence. An example of this would be how the Statue of Liberty on Ellis Island represents liberty. All of the locations are dependent on one another, creating interdependence. An example of interdependence is how we trade with many countries for their resources. We depend on the Middle East for their oil. (De Blij, Fouberg, Murphy,8)

Concepts of Culture
There are many different cultures with many different belief systems and values. These belief systems can identify a group of people. There are many examples of these belief systems. One is ethnocentrism which is the belief that all other cultures are inferior to your own. Imperialism is when a country extends their political or economic power over another culture or region. This may be direct through colonialism or indirect through trade. A culture that believes in masculinism believes that males are the predominant sex. Environmental determinism is the belief that the land affects the human activity in the area. (Knox, Marston, 3)

Regional vs. Systematic
Regional Geography focuses on boundaries or analytical constructs. This is based off of landscape language, religion, political systems, and economical systems. Systematic Geography is the study of topics. These topics may be population, religion, language, and economic development. (Knox, Marston, 4)

Tools
Observation is gathering data through research, laboratory experiments, and field work. Visualization is organizing information into maps, tables, diagrams, and essays. Analysis is relating the information to real life situations and creating a web of connections. Models are figures that simplify the concepts that are learned through all of this. (Knox, Marston, 4)

Spatial Analysis
There are many ways to identify a place or location. Nominal location is when we indicate a place by giving it a name. Absolute location is referring to a place with degrees in latitude and longitude. Relative location is directions in reference to other locations. A site is physical descriptions of the location such as soil, vegetation, usage,etc. Situation is similar to relative location.
There are corresponding ways to get to the location. Absolute distance is measured in miles or kilometers. Relative direction is measured in time or amount of money it takes to get there. Distance may be a mental perception, or an opinion of how far a place may be. Friction of distance is the fact that if a location is too far away, many people will not travel there due to the lack of ease or money needed. Distance-delay function is the idea that the farther away from a central point, the decrease of activity becomes more apparent. Topological Space is the connections between specific points. Accessibility is the measure of ease to get from one point to another. (De Blij, Fouberg, Murphy, 10)

The Five Themes
The first theme is location The point of place creates a reaction and a reason to why that reaction happened.Location is practically the underlying concept of all Human Geography because of this.Geographers can use location to predict events or understand why past event occurred. This is called Location Theory.
The next is Human-Environment Interactions. The environment affect human actions through resource location, dangers, and pleasing climates. People affect the environment through pollution, altering ecosystems, and damaging resources.
The third theme is regions. Geographic phenomenas are not dispersed across Earth evenly. Regions may be may be agglomerated into different areas which are termed regions.
The next theme is place. A sense of place is remembering events and connecting memories with emotions about a place. A perception of a place is a feeling towards a location based on media.
The last theme is movement which can be described as the mobility of humans, products, and concepts. Spatial interaction depends on accessibility. (et al, 11)

Proof of Existence
Cultural landscape is the proof of human existence on a place. It may be seen in layers. Sequent occupence is the lasting proof of ancient civilizations. (et al, 12)

Maps
Cartography is the creation of maps. Reference maps show locations of places and landforms in relation to the surrounding area. Thematic maps show the migration of an idea or product.
Absolute location is the precise coordinates of a place using longitude and latitude. The relative location marks a place in relation to its surroundings. Mental maps are a remembrance of a place we have never been through what we have studied. Even if you have never been to the west coast of the United States, you would most likely be able to recognize the states&#39; formation on a map. Activity spaces are the area in which you would normally spend your time. This allows you to be comfortable in your surroundings by know where everything is. (et al, 14)

Technologies
Global positioning systems (GPS) use sattelite imagery to determine the location of places and providing directions on how to reach this point. Remote sensing data is gathered through the use of satellites and aircraft. It is mostly used through images to show the effects of natural disasters. You may have seen remote sensing at work when you saw the eye of a hurricane on the news. Geographic information systems (GIS) is basically a layered map of all different types of information using digital technology. (et al,17)

Regions
A formal region may be spotted because of its individuality. An example would be a large desert surrounded by a mountain range. A functional region may be harder to recognize for it is the interaction of two regions. Perceptual regions are the regions where we may see the relationship between the land and the human population. (et al, 22)

Culture
Culture is the similar beliefs and values of a group of people. These values or other interests are considered cultural traits. The combination of many cultural traits is called a culture complex. A cultural hearth is where these culture traits originated. (et al, 26)

Diffusion
Culture diffusion is the spread of a culture trait from its hearth. Distance and time may inhibit or decrease diffusion. This is termed distance decay. Cultural barriers may totally inhibit the culture traits because of their own belief systems. Expansion diffusion is when the idea or product stays popular in the hearth while diffusing outward. Contagious diffusion is when almost all of the adjacent communities are using the product or idea. Hierarchical diffusion is when the trait is first passed to influential people or places. It then follows the places in the direction of rank. Stimulus diffusion is when the trait is directly introduced to the new community. Relocation diffusion is the movement of the people who have this trait and directly transport it to a new location. (et al, 28)

Possibilism
Possibilism is the idea that humans are in control of their culture, not their surrounding environment. In contrast, cultural ecology is the belief that the environment does affect the culture of people. Political ecology is the idea that a culture is based off of political and economical regulations. (et al, 31)

Unit 2- Population

Where People Live
People are not evenly distributed in the world. One-third of world&#39;s population lives in China and India. China and India have large areas of land where no one lives. This means they have high population densities in larger cities. One-fourth of the world&#39;s population is located in eastern Asia alone. Southern Asia holds the second biggest amount of people in the world. Many people believe countries under count the minority populations. This leads to less representation in the government so a state may not be fully represented (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 39-44).

The Rise or Fall of Populations in Certain Places
Paul Ehrlich published The Population Bomb in the late 1960s. This publication raised awareness about how the many countries&#39; populations were increasing too rapidly. This rapid increase in the these countries&#39; populations were outpacing food production. Ehrlich&#39;s idea is much like Thomas Malthus&#39;s idea. Malthus believed the world&#39;s population was outpacing food production, but he believed that the food that fed a country was only grown in that country. His idea was flawed, but Ehrlich took his idea and revised it to the national level instead of the world level. Every population has a doubling time, or the time it takes to double that population. Every growth rate for a population has a doubling time. The world&#39;s doubling time has dropped from 1,600 years to 51 years in the past 2,000 years (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg.44-45).

Population Changes
Population changes are most commonly measured by the crude birth rate the crude death rate, and the rate of natural increase. The crude birth rate, or CBR, is total number of lives births annually per 1,000 people in the area being looked at. For example, if a country&#39;s CBR is 35, this means that for every 1,000 people in the country, there are 35 babies born over a one-year period in that country. The crude death rate, or CDR, is the total number of deaths in a one-year period per 1,000 people in the area being looked at. The CDR of a country is expressed in the same way as the country&#39;s CBR. If a country&#39;s CDR is 15, it is expressed as 15 deaths a year per 1,000 people living in that country. The word crude is used because these rates are calculated in a society, not certain individuals or groups. The rate of natural increase, or RNI, is the percentage of population growth in a year. It is found by subtracting the CDR from the CBR. For example, if the CBR is 35 births per 1,000 people and the CDR is 15 deaths per 1,000 people, then the RNI is 20 per 1,000, or 2.0%. The RNI excludes migration (Rubenstein, 2005, pg. 53).
Currently, the world&#39;s RNI is 1.3. This means that every year, the world&#39;s population is growing 1.3%. This rate is not nearly as high as it was in 1963 at 2.2%, the all-time high record. The RNI has dropped sharply in the past few decades. The world population is growing by 80 million people annually. The annual increase has dropped at a much slower rate than the RNI because the population base is much higher than it was in the past. For example, the world&#39;s population increased from 4 billion to 5 billion people in just 13 years, and the world&#39;s population increased from 5 billion to 6 billion in just 12 years. The population base continues to grow so much that a one-tenth of 1% change could dramatically change the world&#39;s population growth. The difference between a 1% and 2% change is huge because of the high population base. The difference between a RNI of 1.0% and a RNI of 1.3% is 15 million more people are added to the world&#39;s population with a RNI of 1.3% than a RNI of 1.0% (Rubenstein, 2005, pgs. 53-57).
Another way to calculate the total number of births in a society is the total fertility rate, or TFR. TFR is the average number of children a will give birth to during her childbearing years (generally 15 to 50). The TFR is more of a prediction of how many children will be born per woman in the future. The TFR is calculated by assuming that women in the future will have the same number of babies that women in the present will have. Currently, the global TFR is about 3. The TFR is generally higher in less developed countries and lower in more developed countries. Beside CDR, to other forms of mortality measurements are infant mortality rate, or IMR, and life expectancy. IMR is the number of deaths annually of children under the age of one. It is expressed as the number of deaths per 1,000 births. The higher IMRs are in poorer countries, such as sub-Saharan African countries. The lower IMRs are found in Europe and other more developed countries. IMR usually mirror the country&#39;s health care system. Countries with more well-trained doctors and nurses and more modern hospitals and medicines have lower IMR than countries with less well-trained doctors and nurses and less modern hospitals and medicines. Life expectancy is another form of mortality measurement. Life expectancy is the total number of years an individual is expected to live in the current conditions in which they live in. The life expectancy is higher in wealthier countries and lower in poorer countries (Rubenstein, 2005, pgs. 55-57).

Population Policies
Population policies can also affect population growth. Population policies are policies put in place by a country&#39;s government to help influence the country&#39;s overall growth rate. There are three types of population policies: expansive, eugenic, and restricted. Expansive policies encourage families to have many children. Also, the rate of natural increase increases. Some governments pay families to have more children. Many European countries have put these policies in place because of their aging populations. Eugenic policies favor one ethnic or racial group. These policies can discriminate secretly by making the unfavored groups pay taxes. Nazi Germany is an example of this type of population policy. Restrictive population policies encourage families to have small families. These policies decrease the rate of natural increase. An example of a restrictive population policy is China&#39;s "One Child Policy" (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 63-64).

Migration
There are three basic types of movement: cyclic movement, periodic movement, and migration. Cyclic movement is a journey that begins in one place and ends in that same place. Cyclic movement can be described as a daily routine. The space a person needs to function in during cyclic movement is called activity space. Commuting is a form of cyclic movement. Commuting is described as the journey from home to work and then back to home again. This can include many different forms of transportation, such as by bus, by train, and by car. Seasonal movement is another form of cyclic movement. An example of seasonal movement is living in the US for the winter and then returning to the Canada to live for the rest of the year. Nomadism is another form of cyclic movement. Although not very common, it still exists in parts of Africa and Asia. Nomadism is when nomads travel a long, familiar path over and over again. These nomads become familiar with the water and food sources along the path they travel (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs.71-72).
Periodic movement is a like cyclic movement; it is a journey away from home. The difference is periodic movement is a long period away from home while cyclic movement is a short journey away from home. A common form of periodic movement is migrant labor. Millions of workers temporarily move to places where cheap labor is needed. Transhumance is a system pastoral farming in which farmers move their livestock to different pastures depending on the season. It is considered a periodic movement because it involves a long time away from home for the farmer. Going away to college can be categorized as periodic movement. Even though you are keeping the same home address, most of your time is spent at the college. Military service is another form of periodic movement. It involves being temporarily relocated to a new place that can last several years (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, p.72).
Migration is defined as being moving permanently to a new location across large distances. International migration is the movement between country borders. When a migrant leaves the country they live in, they are called an emigrant, and they are called an immigrant when they enter a new country to live. Immigration adds to the population of a country, and emigration subtracts from the population of a country. Internal migration is migration that takes place inside a country&#39;s borders. Internal migration varies due to the mobility of that country&#39;s population. Longer distances are more common in countries with a mobile population. In the US, internal migrants are more likely to move from one economic region to another. Because of this, there has been an increase in internal migration in the past few decades to the Sunbelt and Far West regions. In country&#39;s with a less mobile population, common internal migration is moving from the rural areas to the capital city of that country. Reasons for internal migration are economic opportunities, retirement, and the want for different lifestyles (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs.72-73).

Why People Migrate
Forced migration deals with a position of authority. This authority makes people move without giving them a choice, also known as involuntary migration. a good example of forced migration is the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade. Africans were taken from their homes and sent to the Americas and the Caribbean to be sold as slaves. Many of the Africans did not survive the boat ride from Africa. This was the largest practice of forced migration in history. The number of African sold into slavery is not known, but the estimates are anywhere from 12 million to 30 million. Africans were first sent to the Caribbean during the 16th century. Despite popular belief, most of the Africans were not sent to North America. The majority of them were sent to the Caribbean and South America (mainly Brazil). Forced migration still exists today in the form of countermigration. For example, in the 1990s, the US sent Haitian immigrants that arrived in Florida back to Haiti (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs.74-76).
Voluntary migration is migration in which the immigrants have a choice on if they want to move and to where they want to move. Push and Pull factors coincide with voluntary migration. Push factors are conditions that "push" people away from the place they are currently living. Pull factors are factors that attracts migrants to a certain location. Distance decay comes into the picture when talking about pull factors. Distance decay is the idea that the farther an individual or group away from another individual or group, the communication between them decreases. This idea can help people decide where they want to move to because they may not want to lose communication with another group by migrating far away. Step migration is moving to a certain destination in stages. An example of this could be moving a peasant living in the rural area of Brazil. His goal is to migrate to the capital city of Brasilia. First, he will most likely move to a small village, then to a town nearby. From the town, he will most likely move to a city, and then finally, he will move to Brasilia. However, not all migrants who set out for a large city will make it there. They may encounter employment along the way to the large city, or intervening opportunity (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs.74, 76-77).
There are different types of push and pull factors: economic conditions, political circumstances, armed conflict and civil war, environmental conditions, culture and traditions, and technological advances (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 77-79).
Economic Conditions- Many people face poverty in their home country. In search of a better life, many immigrants, both illegal and legal, cross country borders to look for new opportunities to find work (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 77).
Political Circumstances- Many immigrants migrate because of the way the government works in their country. Also, a certain government system may attract immigrants to a country (de Blij,Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 77).
Armed Conflict and Civil War- Many people cannot stay safe in their country during a war. This causes people to migrate to safer regions (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 77).
Environmental Conditions- Environmental conditions can mean anything from natural disasters to famines to pollution. This causes migration to another location that could support the group of people (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 77-78).
Culture and Traditions- The culture and traditions of a certain group of people differ from group to group. When a new political change takes over the government, they might not agree with the culture and traditions of a certain group. This may cause the group to leave the country and practice their culture and traditions somewhere else (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 78-79).
Technological Advances- Different areas of the world are more technologically advanced than other areas. In those areas, communication and transportation systems are more modern and easier to use. This attracts new immigrants to these areas (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 79).

Where People Migrate
For the past 5 centuries, people have traveled the globe for reasons other than exploration, fame, and spices; these travelers are migrating. The majority of global migration patterns are Europeans migrating to the Americas, the Caribbean, parts of Asia, Africa, and Australia. Other global migration flows include Indians to Africa, Africans to the Americas, and China to the Americas and the rest of Southeast Asia (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 79-81).
Guest workers are labor migrants that came from other European countries to replace the workers in Western European countries that died in World War II. Guest workers were legal immigrants that held work visas.These migrants were not forced to come to these countries; they wanted to come work. This gave them an opportunity to find work and earn money for their families&#39;. The majority of guest workers worked as agricultural laborers or in the service industry, such as hotels, restaurants, and tourist attractions (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 86).
A refugee is a person who flees their homeland because of fear of persecution. In 2000, the United Nations put the refugee count at over 24 million. There are two types of refugees: internal refugees and international refugees. Internal refugees, also known as displaced persons, are refugees that do not cross an international border. These people are usually under counted, if they are even counted. An international refugee, on the other hand, is a refugee that has crossed one or more international borders. Usually, they find a refugee camp that is not in their own country. One of the largest areas for refugees is Sub-Saharan Africa. Many incidents, such as the collapse of the country Zaire and the violent outbreak between the Tutsi and Hutu groups in Rwanda. Also, Sudan significantly contributes to the refugee problem in Sub-Saharan Africa. Sudan has been in a civil war for about 20 years. The government began the genocide in Darfur. Many people in Darfur are refugees because they will be killed if they don&#39;t move away from their homes (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 86-90).
Since the September 11 attacks in 2001, the United State&#39;s immigration policies have become more strict on security. A big concern in the US is illegal immigration. The Justice Department allows for illegal immigrants to be detained even if they have no ties to terrorist organizations. This policy is in place because of the idea that terrorists will travel to a country, such as Mexico or Haiti, to illegally immigrate to the US to commit terrorist acts (Rubenstein, 2005, pgs. 94-95).

Unit 3- Culture

Culture
A culture may be defined as a group of people who share similar values and practices. These people may be acknowledged by themselves or by outsiders who recognize their uniqueness. There are two main types of cultures: folk culture and popular culture. Folk culture is focused on a small, homogeneous population. This population is normally located in a rural area where the cultural traits are cohesive. A local culture is a culture where the people involved are mostly located in one area. People involved in this culture try keep their culture alive by preventing the traits that distinguish them from other cultures. Interactions with other cultures may influence a local culture.Popular culture may be present in a large, heterogeneous population Popular culture is mostly apparent in urban areas where ideas and products may diffuse faster through Hierachical diffusion. Hierarchical diffusion follows a pattern from higher connectivity to lower connectivity. The begins from the hearth, or the city where the idea or product originated. It then follows a diffusion route to the deglommerated areas. Many of the products diffused are part of material culture. Architecture, art, culinary, and recreational activities may define a culture. The movement of these practices into other cultures is called culture appropriation. Popular culture is practiced by a large group of diverse people so it will fluctuate.Distance Decay is the idea of more distance leads to less interaction. Communication and transportation are lessening this idea by allowing interaction to increase no matter the distance. Time-space compression is a concept created by David Harvey that expresses the idea that the movement of products and ideas are accelerating. (et al, 2007)

Identity
Identity is how we define anything or anyone. This status is constantly changing. This is because the surrounding environment is either letting us grow or knocking us down. Identifying against is when we compare and contrast ourselves to other people or things to let us realize who we are.(De Blij, Fouberg, Murphy, 127)

Race
Race is a built identity based on culture or appearance. When one race feels superior to another, it is termed racism. Douglas Massey and Nancy Denton define residential segregation as people of different races living in other spaces of the urban environment.(et al, 127)

Immigration
After many immigrants have moved to another place time after time, it creates an area with a lot of the same race. When new immigrants come to this area too, it makes invasion and succession.(et al, 134)

Ethnicity
Ethnicity is another form of identity. Ethnicity is a group of people clumped together because of common ancestry and culture. Ethnicity is used instead of race when the people are in the same area.(et al, 135)

Genders
Gendered places are sites that are designed specifically for men or women. A simple example of this a public restroom. There is a men&#39;s room and a women&#39;s room, and it is not respected for the two to mesh.(et al, 138)

Queer Theory
The queer theory is the relationship between heterosexual people and homosexual people. This can explain whether it is accepted and the reaction towards homosexual people. It has even been found that "gay neighborhoods" have been established in some areas. (et al, 138)

The Basics of Language
A language is a set of symbols and sounds that are used for communication. Language is a rather large part of culture. It describes experiences, values, and thoughts. A group of people that speak the same language generally have similar experiences, values, and thoughts. When a group of people are forced to give up their culture, their language usually disappears with the cultural practices. An example of this can be a result of colonization. A language can also coincide with what a group of people believe in. For example, some African languages do not have a word or term for the concept of a god, so most likely, these groups of Africans don&#39;t believe in a god (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 152-153).
Many societies have a standard language, or a language that is widely used and taught in the area. In some countries with an official language, all people working for the government must have passed an official state examination to test if the person can speak the language or not. Standard languages are usually put in place by the people who hold the power and influence the country. Most standard languages have many dialects under them. Dialects are variants of a language. The differences between dialects can be the vocabulary they use, the way words make up phrases, the pronunciation of words, the rhythm of speech, and the pace at which the speaker speaks. An isogloss is a geographic boundary that shows where a specific linguistic feature occurs. Isoglosses show where dialects are spoken. Usually, they are not a line because there are areas beyond isoglosses that speak the same dialect. Mutual intelligibility is a term used when two people speaking to one another can understand one another. There is an argument over if mutual intelligibility can be used to differentiate languages and dialects. Some say that languages aren&#39;t mutually intelligible, but dialects are. Linguists have rejected mutual intelligibility. Their argument is some languages, such as Scandinavian languages, may be understood by people speaking a different language, but some dialects, such as Mandarin Chinese and Cantonese Chinese, cannot be understood by people speaking a different dialect of the same language (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 155-156).

Language Distribution
Languages are classified because some languages are related and others are not. The origin of the language determines its classification. The most broad classification of languages are language families. Language families are then divided into language subfamilies, or divisions within a language family. The individual language is the last level of classification. There are 15 major language families in the world. They are Indo-European, Afro-Asiatic, Niger-Congo, Saharan, Sudanic, Khoisan, Uralic, Altaic, Sino-Tibetan, Japanese and Korean, Dravidian, Austro-Asiatic, Austronesian, Trans-New Guinea and Australian, and Amerindian. The biggest of them all is Indo-European (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 157-159).
A Proto-Indo-European language is an ancestral Indo-European language that gives the hearth, or the originating place, of the Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit languages. A Proto-Indo-European hearth can link the modern languages from North America to Asia and Australia and from Scandinavia to North Africa. Right now, this is just a hypothesis. To test this hypothesis, there is some research to be done. The first task is to reconstruct the vocabulary. of Proto-Indo-European and its ancestor. The ancient ancestor of the Proto-Indo-European language is the Nostratic language. This language was around long before the First Agricultural Revolution in around 10,000 B.C. The second task is locating the hearth of the language. The third task is tracing the routes in which the language was diffused (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 160).
The Indo-European language family is divided into subfamilies, such as Germanic, Romance, and Slavic. The Germanic subfamily consists of English, German, Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish. These languages are found in Northern Europe. The Romance subfamily includes Spanish, Italian, French, Romanian, and Portuguese. These languages are found in the area where the Roman Empire once existed, such as Southern and Western Europe. The Slavic subfamily consists of Russian, Polish, Czech, Slovak, Ukrainian, Slovenian, Serbo-Croatian, and Bulgarian. These languages are found in Eastern Europe (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 165).

Language Diffusion
Language is diffused by interaction between people. Long ago, languages were diffused by colonization and mercantilism. These two things established different networks of interaction and communication. In modern times, languages are largely diffused by trade. A lingua franca is a common language used by people who speak different languages for the purpose of trade and commerce. A lingua franca can be just one language, or it can be two or more languages combined. When people who speak two or more languages simplify the vocabulary and combine parts of the languages, the result is called a pidgin language. An example of a pidgin language is the Frankish language. It came from the Franks, or people living in southern France. This language combined Arabic, Greek, Spanish, and Italian. The Frankish language was also a lingua franca because it became the common language for trade in the Mediterranean Sea in during the 1200s. Over time, a pidgin language may become the native language for a group of people. When this happens, it is referred to as a creole language. The vocabulary and the structure of a creole language become more complex over time (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 168-169).
A monolingual state is a country in which only one language is spoken. Today, there are no true monolingual states. This is because of the diffusion and mixing of languages and the migration of people. A multilingual state, on the other hand, is a country in which more than one language is being spoken. In some multilingual countries, an official language (or official languages) is adopted. An official language is a language that is used to bring the people of the country together by using a primary language. The purpose of an official language is to allow communication and interaction between people who speak different languages. A global language can mean two different things. One meaning is a language that people use around the world in day-to-day activities. In this case, English is not a global language. The population growth rates are lower in English-speaking areas than non-English speaking areas. However, the other meaning is a common language used for trade and commerce around the world. In this case, English is a global language. Different countries communicate with each other using English, and tourists from different countries use English to find their way around the country they are visiting (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 169-171).

Language and Making Places
Humans are responsible for making places. Places cannot exist with toponym, or the name of a place. According to Yi-Fu Tuan, when people change the toponym of a place, they have the power to "wipe out the past and cal forth the new." Toponyms are part of cultural landscapes. You can find out about the history of a place by looking at changes in the toponym. When a country gets their independence, they usually change the toponyms of places named after the previous colonial figures. Also, the names of the cities and towns are often changed too. The new toponyms are called Post-Colonial Toponyms. After a change in power through a revolution or a coup, the toponyms of places occupied by the previous power are often changed. The new toponyms are called Post-Revolution Toponyms. The last type of toponyms are called Memorial Toponyms. The toponyms of places can be changed in order to memorialize an important person or event (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 171-174).

Religion and Culture
Religion, like language, is a large part of culture. It reflects the identity of the culture. Religions are always changing. Migration and conversion aid in the diffusion of religions. Religion is defined by Robert Stoddard and Carolyn Prorak as "a system of beliefs and practices that attempts to order life in terms of culturally perceived ultimate priorities." Cultural landscapes, such as places of worship, statues, cemeteries, and shrines, are inspired by religion. Religion influences dress, such as turbans, and personal habits, such as beards and ritual scars. Religion influences many societies; however, secularism now exists in some societies. Secularism is the idea that religion should not influence the government, education, or way of life in a society. Because of all of the controversies and arguments about religion, it is considered one of the most complex and controversial aspects of humans (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 179-181).

Origination and Diffusion of Languages
Religions are put into three categories based on what they believe in. They are monotheistic, polytheistic, and animistic religions. Monotheistic religions believe in only one god. Polytheistic religions believe in more than one god. Animistic religions believe in inanimate objects. These religions believe there are spirits inside of the objects. A universalizing religion is a religion that believes their religion is the one true religion that offers a belief system that has universal appeal. Some examples of universalizing religions are Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism. The reason these religions are so large is because of their universalizing characteristic. Universalizing are actively looking for people to convert to their religion. Ethnic religions are religions that are specific to a certain group of people. Followers of an ethnic religion are born into it. These religions are not actively looking for people to convert to their language. An example of an ethnic religion is Judaism. By 500 BCE, the major hearths of philosophy and religion in the world were Southern Asia, the Eastern Mediterranean, and the Huang He River Valley in China (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 181-183).
From the hearth of South Asia, two major religions were discovered: Hinduism and Buddhism. It is also one of the oldest modern world religions dating back 4,000 years ago. Hinduism is the third largest religion in terms of amount of followers. Hinduism doesn&#39;t have a single founder or an official origin. The origin of the religion is believed to be in the Indus River Valley. Hinduism is found mainly in India, and it follows the caste system. The caste system is a way of separating social classes by dividing people into castes, or classes. Hinduism diffused from what is known today as Pakistan to India and parts of Southeastern Asia. Buddhism is a religion that believes enlightenment comes through knowledge, the elimination of greed, complete honesty, and never hurting a fellow human being or animal. Buddhism was founded around 600 BCE by Prince Siddhartha, also known as the Buddha. Buddhism splinters off of Hinduism because of its very strict caste system. Shintoism is a small ethnic religion located in Japan. It is related to Buddhism, and its followers believe in worshiping ancestors and nature. Shintoism was the state religion of Japan from the 19th century to just after World War II (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 184-187).
From the hearth of the Huang He River Valley, Taoism and Confucianism were founded. Taoism is a religion that focuses on living in harmony with nature. It was founded by Lao-Tsu, who published the book titled Tao-te-ching which means "Book of the Way". Confucianism is a philosophy of life. It was created by Confucius. Confucius was appalled at the suffering of the poor in China. He wanted them to assert themselves. He believed that a person&#39;s responsibilities in a society should be determined by their abilities, not their heritage. Confucianism diffused to the areas surrounding China, such as Japan and the Korean Peninsula. These areas practice Buddhism today because of Confucianism (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 187-188).
From the hearth of the Eastern Mediterranean, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam were founded here. Judaism is based on the teachings of Abraham. He united the Jewish people by worshiping one God. According to Jewish teachings, God and Abraham have a covenant, or an agreement, where the Jewish people worship only one God and God will protect the Jewish people. After the Romans destroyed Jerusalem, millions of Jews scattered across Northern Africa to the Iberian Peninsula and to Central Europe. This was known as the diaspora. The diaspora led to the diffusion of Judaism on the Iberian Peninsula and Central Europe. Christianity is based on the teachings of Jesus Christ. It is a monotheistic religion. According to Christian teachings, Jesus is the son of God. He was put on Earth to teach people about how to live their lives&#39; according to God&#39;s plan. Christians celebrate Easter, which is the day Jesus arose from the dead after being crucified three days earlier. Christians also celebrate Good Friday, which is the day Jesus was crucified. Worldwide diffusion of Christianity occurred in the the 16th century by European colonization. Islam is the youngest of the major religions. It is based off the teachings of Muhammad. According to Islamic teachings, Muhammad received a series of revelations. Muhammad preached verses of the Holy Qu&#39;ran, the holy book of the Muslims. The very strict Islamic law system is called Shari&#39;a Law. There are two divisions in the Islamic religion: Sunni Muslims and Shia Muslims. Sunni Muslims believe anyone who is capable of the job should be elected as the Muslim leader. Shai Muslims believe that the Muslim leader should be directly related to Muhammad or appointed by Allah. When he was alive, Muhammad had converted the kings on the Arabian Peninsula to Islam. These kings spread Islam by invading different areas on the Arabian Peninsula and Northern Africa. After that, the Arab empire expanded to Asia and other parts of Africa. This is how Islam diffused. Shamanism is a local faith in which people follow their shaman, or a religious leader, teacher, healer, and visionary. Shamanism is a big part of the local community it is in. Unlike religions such as Islam and Christianity, shamanistic faiths are small and usually isolated (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 189-194).

Religion and Cultural Landscapes
A sacred site is a place or space that has a religious meaning. In ancient times, sacred sites were often physical features, such as mountain peaks and rivers. In more modern times, sacred sites have been abandoned or altered, especially with universalizing religions. The city of Jerusalem is sacred to three religions: Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. The most important sacred site for Jews is in this city. It is called the Western Wall, or the Wailing Wall. It is built at the edge of Temple Mount. Long ago, Jews built two temples on Temple Mount, but they were both destroyed by invaders. The Western Wall is all that remains of the second temple. The wall is a gathering places for Jews to come and offer prayers. Jerusalem is sacred to Christians because it is the place where Jesus&#39;s crucifixion took place just outside the city walls. After the crucifixion, Jesus was buried near the Cross because only kings can be buried inside the city. He rose from the dead three days later. The site of his tomb is located inside the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. The sacred site for Muslims in Jerusalem is a mosque called the Dome of the Rock. The Dome of the Rock is adjacent to the Western Wall. It symbolizes the place where Muslims believe Muhammad arrived from Mecca and went up to heaven. Instead of calling it the Temple Mount, it is called al-Haram al-Sharif, or the Noble Sanctuary (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 196-198).
The Hindu cultural landscape is filled with shrines. This is because the builder of the temple is receives merit and is rewarded. Hindus believe that the location of a temple should minimally disrupt the natural landscape surrounding it. Temples aren&#39;t far from water because they believe the Gods will not want to be far away from water (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 198-199).
Buddhists build temples and shrines that praise the Buddha. A pagoda is one of the more common structures associated with Buddhism. In Buddhism, the cultural landscape doesn&#39;t just involve architecture, it involves Bodhi trees as well. When Buddha reached enlightenment, he sat under a Bodhi tree in Bodh Gaya located in India. People that practice Buddhism visit the descendant of the Bodhi tree Buddha sat under as well as other trees where he might have taught under (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 199).
The cultural landscapes for Christianity have changed over time. In the Medieval Times, churches and cathedrals were the main focus with smaller building around them. Today, cultural landscapes can be the Vatican City for Catholics, a church, or even Christian cemeteries. In the United States, there is not only one form of Christianity, there are many. That is why there are many different types of churches spread around the US (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 201-202).
The majority of cultural landscapes in Islam are mosques. Usually, an Arab city&#39;s mosque is the nicest and best kept after building in the city. Also, the city of Mecca is a cultural landscape. All Muslims are required to make the hajj at least once in their lifetime. The hajj is a pilgrimage for Muslims to the holy city of Mecca. During the hajj, Muslims must go to the Great Mosque to walk around the al-Ka&#39;ba, a cube-like structure that is encased in silk. There is a black stone in the middle of the al-Ka&#39;ba that Muslims kiss. The hajj is one of the Five Pillars of Faith (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 202-206).

Religion and Conflict
Religion has been the basis of conflict for thousands of years. Some countries have interfaith boundaries, or boundaries between major faiths, while other countries have intrafaith boundaries, or boundaries within one faith. An example of interfaith boundaries would be many African countries that have a large Christian population and a large Muslim population. An example of intrafaith boundaries would be Northern Ireland with conflicts between the Catholics and the Protestants (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 206).
The region of Israel and Palestine has been in conflict for centuries. After World War I, the British, who had control over the state of Palestine, created a homeland for Jewish people in Palestine. The British assured the world that the civil rights of the Palestinians would not be taken away; however, that did not happen. Conflicts between the Jews and the Palestinians started almost immediately. In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Israel took control of Palestinian lands in the Golan Heights, Gaza, and the West Bank. Over the last three decades, Jewish presence started to push farther into the West Bank. New housing settlements were being built and the city of Jerusalem was expanded eastward into the West Bank. In the mid-1990s, Israel awarded Gaza and parts of the West Bank with self-government. Now, these areas could govern themselves within Palestinian zones. Although the Gaza Strip has more freedom, the Israeli government still tightly controls what goes in and out of the Palestinian zones. Today, Palestine still attacks Israel through terrorist attacks. Nothing is safe from being blown up. And after a terrorist attack, the Israeli military goes into the Palestinian zones to hunt down suspects and kill people (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 206-208).
The Horn of Africa is not only a linguistically diverse region, but there are different religions here as well. The predominant religions are Islam and Christianity. The Amharic Christians control the Central Highlands of Ethiopia and other Christian groups control the southwestern parts of the Horn of Africa. Muslims control Somalia, most of Eritrea and Djibouti, a small part of Kenya, western Ethiopia, and northern Sudan. In 1950, the UN decided to make Eritrea part of Ethiopia. The Muslim Eritreans did not take kindly to being controlled by the Amharic Ethiopians. The Amharics continued to control the Eritreans and Somalis even after the government of Ethiopia was overthrown by a military dictatorship. The Eritrean&#39;s war for independence lasted 30 years until Eritrea got its independence in 1991. Even after Eritrea&#39;s independence, Ethiopia still had a large Muslim population in the eastern part of the country, a non-Muslim population in the western and southern parts of the country, and the population of Amharic Christians still dominate the Central Highlands of the country (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 208-210).
The conflict within former country of Yugoslavia was another conflict with interfaith boundaries. The two major religions were Christianity and Islam. Yugoslavia was located on the Balkan Peninsula in Europe. Out of the Christian people, the Slovenians and Croats in the western part of the peninsula were Catholic while the Serbians and Montenegrans in the eastern and southern parts of the peninsula were Eastern Orthodox. In the 1300s, the Ottoman Turks sent soldiers to convert some Serbian societies to Islam. The Ottomans took the region by force. There were now a Muslim presence in the middle and southern regions of the peninsula. A strong Muslim presence in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Macedonia. The actual country of Yugoslavia was thrown together after World War I. During World War II, fighting broke out between the pro-Nazi Croats and the anti-Nazi Serbs. During the war, the Nazi-backed Croats committed acts of genocide against the Serbs. Instead of helping this conflict, the new communist dictator of Yugoslavia, Josip Broz Tito, looked the other way. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia declared their independence. The leader of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, tried to force the republics to stay in Yugoslavia. War broke out between Croatia and Serbia. Both sides "cleansed" each other&#39;s lands. Also, both sides attacked the Bosnian Muslims. The Muslims and Croats formed a coalition to fight against Serbia. A new plan was soon put into place by the UN. The countries that formerly made up Yugoslavia joined the UN. The plan called for the dividing of Bosnia and Herzegovina into two republics: one for the Serbs and one for the Muslims and Croats. Sixty thousand UN peacekeepers secure the border between the two republics. After the defeat of the Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, hopes for the stability of the Balkan Peninsula began to raise. The situations between some of these countries is are very fragile, and it will take a while to regain the trust of each other&#39;s trust (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 210-211).
The religious conflict in Northern Ireland is a rather non-violent one. However, there were still some violent acts and rebelling. The conflict is between the Protestant and Catholic populations in Northern Ireland. In the 1700s, England colonized Ireland. The colony served as a source of industrial wealth from the shipyards in the north. Catholics were the dominant religion in Ireland. Protestants soon migrated to the island because of the job opportunities. The Irish Catholics were treated badly by the English by denying them the right to own property or participate in the government. In the early 1900s, the Irish Catholics started to rebel against the colonization of Ireland. The Republic of Ireland was made up of 26 counties. The six counties that made up Northern Ireland were voted to become part of the United Kingdom. Two-thirds of the population were Protestants, who possessed the economic advantages over the Catholics. British troops were brought into the area in 1968 after the terrorist attack made by the Irish Republican Army (IRA). The Catholics and Protestants that live in Northern Ireland segregate themselves from one another. Each group has their own neighborhoods, stores, newspapers, and holidays. In Belfast, Catholics and Protestants have started intermixing with each other in places like college campuses, shopping centers, and downtown clubs (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 211-214).
Religions are always changing. Sometimes, the people of a religion believe that their religion has changed too much. Religious fundamentalism is when religious leaders and followers want to return to the basics or foundations of their religion. This can come about from frustration over loss of religious authority, loss of a sense of local control, the breakdown of a society&#39;s values, and failure to achieve different economic goals. Religious extremism is religious fundamentalism that is taken to the point of violence. An example of extremism is the September 11attacks on the Twin Towers. Fundamentalists can be extremists; however, not all fundamentalists are extremists (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 214).

Unit 4- Political Organization of Space

Introduction
Today a thematic approach to human geography is used in place of the traditional method. Old-style geographers required the memorization of countries and their capitals. Modern geographers are concerned more with the " reasons for particular spatial distributions and the significance of the arrangements (Rubenstein, 2005, p.261)." Even though the methods of teaching have changed, however, it is still important to know the locations of states in the modern world. This knowledge gives students a basic frame of reference.
What is political geography? The study of the political organization of the world is political geography as political geographers study the "spatial manifestations of political processes at various scales" (De Blij et. al., 2007, p.222). For example, although nobody can predict where or when the next war will take place, political geography allows us to study both the cultural and physical factors that often are the reasons of political unrest in the world. Political geographers study the how, why, and what: How have people organized the Earth&#39;s surface into states and alliances? Why have they been organized in this manner? And what are the resulting conflicts that arise due to this arrangement? Additionally, political geography is also a study of the cooperation of states with each other, the boundary disputes, and terrorism (Rubenstein, 2005, p.261).

A Case Study- Changing Borders In Europe
Let&#39;s imagine... you live in the village of Rittershoffen in France while you work in the German village of Worth. Although these two cities are only 30 miles apart (50 kilometers), your daily journey to work forces you to cross the German-French border twice a day. How do you manage this? As a citizen of France, you face no difficulty crossing the border. No guards ask to see your passport or force you to pay custom fines on goods purchased. If you are late, the only consequence is heavy traffic on the bridge spanning the Rhine River, the border between the two countries. The border between these two countries has not always been like this, however. Let&#39;s take a look at this past of the German-French border:
The German-French Border
1670- The French annexed the region of Alsace (lowlands on the modern French side between the west bank of the Rhine River and the Vosges Mountains) from Germanic tribes.
1870- Alsace and the neighboring region of Lorraine were captured from the French by Prussia, which eventually became the core of the new German empire.
Post-World War I- The French regained the two regions and possessed them until World War II.
1940- Germany controlled these two regions during World War II.
1945- Alsace and Lorraine were recaptured by the French.
Post-Cold War- As communism ended in Eastern Europe, France and Germany laid at the core of the world&#39;s richest market area. These two countries both believed the pursuit of a higher standard of living to be more important than fighting over boundaries.
Although the border between France and Germany has cleared, border disputes still occur in Europe. The cities of Ljubljana and Zagreb, once both part of the country Yugoslavia, now are capitals of two different countries: Slovenia and Croatia. Travelers passing the border between these two countries must show a passport and concert currency. Similarly, travelers between Vilnius and Moscow (both once part of the Soviet Union) also must present a passport and exchange currency before crossing the border between Lithuania and Russia (Rubenstein, 2005, p.262).

How is space politically organized into states and nations?
Political geography, as you know, studies the spatial manifestations of various political processes at different scales. At the global scale, the world is divided into what are known as states. A state is a politically organized territory with a stable population, defined borders, and sovereign government along with being recognized as a state by the international community. Examples may be any countries, including China or Canada. What many of us do not understand, however, is that the modern division of the world into states is anything but stable or natural. "The present day division of the world political map into states is a product of endless accommodations and adjustments within and between human societies (De Blij et al., 2007, p.222)." Human territoriality is a term generally referring to the opinion of Robert Sack who describes human territoriality as "the attempt by an individual or group to affect, influence, or control people, phenomena, and relationships, by delimiting and asserting control over a [specific] geographic area (De Blij et. al., 2007, p.222)." There are several ways for a group to control another, including physical force or organized sets of laws. His view contrasts with that of Robert Audrey, who believes that human territoriality is similar to the general behavior of animals. By contrast, Sack believes that human territoriality is shown in many arrangements based on the settings (as the territorial strategy changes) and should not be compared to mere animal instinct. Human behavior is learned unlike animals where behavior is instinctive. Central to the idea of state is the concept of territoriality, making states such as the USA or Portugal examples of a territoriality. The concept of territoriality today is tied closely with the concept of sovereignty. Sovereignty is known as possessing independent control over a territory both politically and militarily (having the last say over their respective territory). For example, as a nation that is recognized as being a state is also recognized as being sovereign within the borders, the United States of America along with Great Britain. Under international law, states are sovereign, giving them the right to defend their territorial integrity from other states (De Blij et. al., 2007, p.223).

The Modern State Idea
"Because territoriality manifests itself in different ways, the idea of the state looked different in different regions of the world 400 or 500 years ago. The role territory played in defining the state and the sovereign varied by region (De Blij et al.,2007, p.223)". Europe was not the only one who had territorially organized political units. For example, in Native American tribes were not exclusive in that they often shared hunting grounds with friendly, neighboring tribes. Also, tribes held the territory, rather than by individuals in the territory, communally. The concept of territories and state-like political areas were evident in Southeast Asia. However, the European state idea deserves particular interest in that it was the foundation for the modern state system. Additionally, the Greek philosophies also play an important role in the modern state idea. From countries along the Mediterranean Sea, to Greek, Rome, and the United Kingdom, geographers can see several aspects of the modern state system. Negotiated in 1648, the Peace of Westphalia marked the beginning of the modern state in Europe. Concluding the major religious war in Europe (the Thirty Years&#39; War), the treaties were made up of a new language that recognized state and nationhood, clearly defined borders, along with guarantees of security. These treaties laid the foundation of territorially defined states in Europe. This peace also stabilized religious conflict in many parts of Europe. "Thus, the political-geographic map of Europe in 1648 was fractionizing and evolving... The emerging political state was accompanied by mercantilism, which led to the accumulation of wealth through plunder, colonization, and the protection of home industries and foreign markets (De Blij et al.,2007, p.223)." Finally, the descent of the absolutist rule created an increasingly wealthy middle class. This new modern state system allows for territories to define society rather than the society defining territory(De Blij et al.,2007, p.223).

Nation-state
A nation-state is a politically organized space (a state) whose citizens are of the same culture (a nation). It is very rare when the nation and state occupy the same space, but it is what is preferred by most states and their governments (as the state is more stable with only one nation) as nations, not states, express the greatest nationalism. Even for the people, a nation-state is the "ultimate form of political-territorial organization, the right expression of sovereignty, and the best route to stability (De Blij et al.,2007, p.226)." Examples in the modern world include France and Spain (who built a single national identity from two or more divergent nations); Germany and Italy (who brought multiple similar nations together into one state); and Ireland, Norway, and Poland (whose nations separated to form different states) (De Blij et al.,2007, p.226).

Multi-state Nations, Multinational States, and Stateless Nations
As you may have learned, very few places in the world have stable nations with well-defined borders. Most states satisfy the definition of a multinational state, a state with multiple nations within its borders. Yugoslavia is an example, as all the citizens never achieved a sense of the Yugoslav nationality. All the millions of people either identified themselves as Slovenes, Croats, Serbs, or a member of yet another ethnic group. Another possibility is a multistate nation, where a nation stretches beyond states" borders. One example is shown in the overlapping nations of Hungary and Romania (The territory of Transylvania has frequently changed borders affecting the population). A stateless nation is a nation (defined cultural group) that has no specific state. In other words, these nations span between many diverse states. The Kurds and Palestinians are two examples of stateless nations (De Blij et al., 2007, p.228).

European Colonialism and the Diffusion of the Nation-State Model
Although often referring to the European colonization during the 16th century (because of its magnitude and impact), colonialism is a general term that describes the rule of a country over an alien, separate people and place. The established settlements are imposed political and economic control by the autonomous power, often resulting in unequal economic and cultural relations. There have been two major waves of colonialism. The first in the 16th century involved Spain and Portugal and was later joined by Britain, France, the Netherlands, and Belgium and spread the European idea of capitalism. The second wave of colonialism occurred after the independence movements in the Americas during the late 19th century. Britain, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, and Italy met for the Berlin Conference and divided the map of Africa. Although the reasons for these waves of colonialism were mainly for economic profit or for spreading religion (Christianity), these conquests were also responsible for laying the groundwork for the state system and capitalist world economy. Even after the end of colonialism, the organization of space and the world economy remained. However, the now independent colonies are still closely tied to the rest of the world. Diversely separated areas were tied together due to colonialism, producing what is today known as the world economy. Wealth is unevenly distributed around the world, ranging from Haiti&#39;s GNP of $510 and Norway&#39;s of $42,222, but to truly understand the world economy, we must look at the big picture (De Blij., 2007, p.231).

Construction of the Capitalist World Economy
Immanuel Wallerstein"s research on the world economy can be simply put as three main points. The first is that the &#39;world economy has one market and a global division of labor (De Blij et al., 2007, p.232)&#39;. The world economy, as you may know, is capitalist. The capitalistic market began in the 15th century and spread through European colonialism, finally including the entire world by the 20th century. Rather than the government, in capitalism the people, corporations, or states (with the goal of earning a profit) exchange produced goods with the world market. Producers can commodify products and take advantage of the world labor supply to maximize profit. Commodification is a process used by producers to maximize profit involving selling, buying, and exchanging priced products. "Companies create new products, generate new twists on old products, and create demand for the products through marketing (De Blij et al., 2007, p.232)." Second, "although the world has multiple states, almost everything takes place within the context of the world economy (De Blij et al., 2007, p.323)." This is mainly due to colonialism, as although it was relatively simple for colonies to gain political independence, it is almost impossible for them to ever gain economic independence. This creates a tied-together economy, resulting in both positive and negative costs that ultimately change places. Finally, the last of the three points is that "the world economy is a three-tier structure (De Blij et al., 2007, p.232)". The world economy is a three-tier structure: the core, the periphery, and semi-periphery. Core processes incorporate higher levels of education and include higher wages and more technology. There processes develop more wealth in the global economy. On the contrary, periphery processes include the lower levels of education and incorporate lower salaries and less technology (and generate less wealth to the world economy). Semi-peripheries, as you can imagine, are simply a buffer between the two extremes of core and periphery. This process generally includes the exploitation of the periphery by the core. Although these are processes, they occur in places and are sometimes assigned to states (as you can see in maps of the world economy). For example, the US and Canada are core states while Chile and Iraq are periphery.

A Sunday on La Grande Jatte
A Sunday on La Grande Jatte is a pointillist painting hung in the Art Institute of Chicago. Painted by the French painter Georges Pierre Seurat, the artwork demonstrates a post-Impressionist method of painting millions of points, each individual, single-color brush strokes. By taking a step back, you then see the full painting and how each dot contributed to the beauty of the complete work. This art is often compared to the world economy, for (as has been stated before) the world economy is made up of hundreds of states, but only by looking at the big picture do we understand the role of each "dot" in the whole (De Blij et al., 2007, p.232).

How do states spatially organize their governments?
Political geographer Richard Hartshorne described two forces within a state as either centrifugal or centripetal. A centrifugal force divides a state or nation. Examples range from internal religious conflicts to political, ethnic, or economic differences. A centripetal force unifies the people within a common state or nation. These could be as simple as a national culture and common faith or even as complex as the unification during a war (De Blij et. al., 2007, p.234).

Form of government
A federal system is a political system in which power is shared between the national and state governments. Examples can range from the United States (where the death penalty, the access to alcohol, and the concealed weapons are limited by states) or Nigeria (where the Muslim North follow Sharia law and the South, being Christian or animist, do not). Although there is variation to the extent at which a State is federal, this system often allows a government to keep its state unified. This type of system is considered the most expressive political system, by Australian geographer K. W. Robinson, as it allows for regional differences to coexist. On the contrary, a unitary system is a political system where the state is not divided into provinces or territories but where the state is governed as a centralized unit, often not accommodating the outlying, minority regions. Most European governments were unitary until the end of World War II. Modern examples include the United Kingdom or France (De Blij et. al., 2007, p.235).

Devolution
Devolution can be described as the change in political power in a state, from a more centralized unitary system to a more federal system. This can be permanently written in a reconstructed constitution (as in Spain) or temporary without the alteration of a constitution (as in the United Kingdom). Devolutionary forces can happen at any time, usually because of either ethnocultural, economic, or spatial.

Electoral Geography
Because the Constitution of the United States establishes a system of territorial representation, it is important to understand that the spatial organization of the districts determines who is represented and impacts who is elected. The process by which districts are redrawn and moved so that they encompass an even number of people (for equal representation) is known as reapportionment. This occurs every ten years in the United States, the same time the census is taken to count the population of the State. Reapportionment and redistricting main goal is equal representation, along with compact contiguous districts and equality of racial and linguistic minorities. Examples include gerrymandering, the drawing of districts to favor certain groups, and majority-minority method, requirements allowing minorities representation. Being named after Governor Elbridge Gerry, the term gerrymandering defines the process by which districts are drawn and redistricted to favor a group. Although gerrymandering occurs today, it is often for the reason of giving representation to the minorities. Another example of gerrymandering is during the 1950s and 1960s in the United State, a time when minorities (African Americans) were often refused to vote.

Unit 5- Agriculture

Agriculture
Throughout the units of human geography, often we note differences between a less developed country and a more developed country. In this unit we will discover one of the most prominent differences between a more and less developed nation. Let&#39;s start with the United States or Canada. There are very few full farmers, and even these are more involved with machinery and computers than the average office worker. This results in the canning and preservation of foods. When you go to the grocery story to pick up food, you rarely are reminded of farmland. This highly mechanized and productive farming method is fundamentally different from a still-developing nation. Almost all of China&#39;s population are subsistent farmers, who work only to feed their families with little (if any) surplus to trade (Rubenstein, 2005, p.261). Agriculture affects almost every part of society, and without agriculture human civilization would have been nearly impossible. Not only does it provide us with food, but it even creates work-field for several people (including farmers, scientists, and businesspeople). Economics is also tightly tied with agriculture as it is a global market. Even the government takes control of many agricultural aspects, as distribution of food to people is vital (Rhoades, 2011). In this unit we look at how agriculture has changed from the very first historic-records of it to modern-day, commercial agriculture and how agricultural methods vary around the world.

What is agriculture, and where did agriculture begin?
Agriculture is the deliberate cultivation and domestication of plants and animals for human benefit (subsistence or economic gain) to produce food, clothing, feed, industrial products, and fuel (Rhoades, 2011). Although when we think of agriculture, we think of food, only about half of all the staple grains grown in the United States are actually consumed by people. Another huge portion of agriculture in the United States is used to feed livestock (Blij, Fouberg, & Murphy, 2006, p.331). Food products can either come from "plants or from animals that eat plants. Such crops as corn, rice, and wheat provide food for billions of people. These crops also can provide food for livestock animals, which are raised for their meat, milk, or eggs. Some crops are grown to make fuel for automobiles. Others, such as cotton and linen, are used to make clothing and other materials (2011)," says Robert E. Rhoades, distinguished research professor of anthropology at the University of Georgia.
"A common way of classifying economic activities is to focus on what is being produced (Blij et al., 2006, p.331)." Agriculture, for example, is considered a primary activity. The figure below explains the different levels of economic activities.

Hunting, Gathering, and Fishing
Hunting, gathering, and fishing were the major sources of food before agriculture was developed (known as foraging), and it occurred everywhere in the world (Rhoades, 2011). Sizes of groups and types of food eaten depended mainly on location, climate, and resources. While certain groups may have eaten nuts, others may have hunted for caribou herds (Blij et al., 2006, p.332). Before plant and animal domestication, the animals and plants the hunter-gatherers ate looked very different from what they do today (Rhoades, 2011).

Terrain and Tools
Hunter-gatherers, before developing agriculture, had worked to perfect tools, control fires, and modify their environments based on their needs. For example, one important achievement for human communities was the development of fire. Although the first opportunities to control fire were natural (from lightening or combustion of surface heated coal), people soon realized that fire could be created with the rapid hand rotation of a wooden stick in a small hole around dry tinder. Fire became a sign of community as it was the focal point of settlements. It was not only a means to hunt animals, but also assisted in making food digestible (Blij et al., 2006, p.332).
In addition to the development of and containment of fire, human communities began to alter their environments even before agriculture had been developed. For example, in the fishing field, by cutting off patches of standing water from the open sea, humans were able to harvest fish such as shellfish. Humans began to make use of the various migration cycles of animals and fish. During the winter, in addition, people even began storing food (Blij et al., 2006, p.332).

The First Agricultural Revolution
The First Agricultural Revolution is the name of what has been marked as the first deliberate tending of crops and breeding of animals. According to geographer Carl Sauer, the hearth of plant domestication was Southwest Asia, also called the Fertile Crescent, over 14,000 years ago. The areas combination of human settlements, forest margins, and fresh water streams is believed by many geographers to be the start of root crops (plants grown from the roots or cuttings of another). The process we all know is referred to as seed crops (reproduction of plants by cultivating seeds) and is much more complex, requiring seed selection, sowing, watering, and well-timed harvesting. He belived in only areas of plenty would the necessary experiments for the establishment of agriculture and the settlement of land take place. Although it is believed the hearth of agriculture was the Fertile Crescent, the practice developed in many different places and at many different times. People all over the world discovered agriculture allowed for a reliable food source and more permanent settlements (Blij et al., 2006, p.333).

Stone Age Connection
Let&#39;s take a look at the Stone Age and see how it went about the first agricultural revolution.
The Stone Age is the period between 2.5 million years ago to approximately 3000 BC. The period is termed the Stone Age because humans during the time used tools made of stone, rather than of metal. The period is followed by the Bronze Age, the time when bronze replaced stone. The Stone Age is divided based on the varying tool making techniques: the Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic periods (Fagan, 2011).The transition from the Paleolithic period (old stone age) to a more settled way of life including animal domestication and agriculture is described as the Neolithic Revolution (Encyclopdia Britannica, 2011), otherwise termed the First Agricultural Revolution.

Animal Domestication
Let&#39;s take a look at the Stone Age and see how it went about the first agricultural revolution.
Perceived to have occurred as early as 8000 years ago, animal domestication occurred after the starting of agriculture and in steps. Goats, sheep, pigs, and several other animals became part of human communities, and these animals changed considerably since then (It has been proven by archaeologists that animals generally became smaller over time, as when penned up, animals don&#39;t have to worry about predators or catching prey. In addition, people choose to keep the more calm and docile of the animals, modifying over time the total appearance of the animals themselves.) Animal domestication began when animals were kept as pets for ceremonial purposes. Dogs and cats attached themselves to human settlements very early. The animals themselves may have kept close to human settlements, forging through the trash or protecting themselves from predators. Humans spread the word quickly, for there were several advantages of animal domestication: as for carrying heavy burdens, being a source of meat, and providing us with milk (Blij et al., 2006, p.336).

Hunter-Gatherers and Subsistence Agriculture in the Modern World
Often being pressured to change their livelihoods in the context of the globalized world economy, hunter-gatherers like the "San of Southern Africa, the Aboriginals of Australia, the indigenous peoples of Brazil, and several other groups in the Americas, Africa, and Asia have been studied, mapped, recorded, photographed, donated to, defended, and in many cases exploited (De Blij et. al., 2007, p.337)."

Unit 6- Washington Consensus

Free Trade
The Washington Consensus is a label for free trade. One of the elements of free trade is that this allows countries to use their own resources to make a profit. This expansion to other countries through trade increases a country&#39;s growth with global technologies. (De Blij, Fouberg, Murphy, 420)

Networks
Networks are basically webs of connectivity that do not have a point of origin. Networks can be found all over the world with the use of communication and transport technologies. Information and resources can now be dispersed over wide spaces. (et al, 421)

Global Cities
Global cities have a network of their own, creating a powerful linkage. Many global cities may act as hearths in many situations. (et al, 421)

Participatory Development
Participatory development is similar to a democracy. This means that the locals have a say in how their country develops. The citizens help decide what direction the city should grow. (et al, 424)

LETS
The local exchange trading system (LETS) is a way of bartering that works on a small network. People choose this because it evades from the citizens having to use a normal grade of development. (et al, 425)

Integration
Have you ever heard the saying "putting all of your eggs in one basket"? This means that all of the concentration is focused on one skill or trade. This is the idea of horizontal integration. In contrast, vertical integration is where a company has many trades that they use to make a profit. When vertical integration is crossed it creates synergy. (et al, 425)

Gatekeepers
Gatekeepers are people or companies who regulate access to valuable information. These people can choose to release the information or not. (et al, 426)

Development
A country is developing if there is progress made in technology, education, and socioeconomic welfare. The three major areas of concern with developing countries are development in economic welfare, development in technology and production, and development in social welfare. A common way to measure a country&#39;s development in economic welfare is finding the gross national product, or GNP. Gross national product is a measure of a country&#39;s officially recorded goods and services produced by its citizens and different corporations in a given year. The GNP includes goods and services produced inside and outside a country&#39;s borders. GNP is much broader than gross domestic product, or GDP. Gross domestic product includes only goods and services produced inside a country&#39;s borders in a given year. Gross national income, or GNI, calculates the financial worth of what is produced in a country plus the income received through investments made outside of the country. Economists have turned to GNI because it is a more accurate way of determining a country&#39;s wealth in relation to a global economy. A common way to standardize GNI data is to look at it as per capita GNI. To find the per capita GNI of a country, divide the GNI with the population of the country. GNI is a limited measurement because it only includes the country&#39;s formal economy, or the monitored economy that is taxed by the government. The countrys informal economy, or the illegal or uncounted economy that isn&#39;t monitored or taxed. Informal economies can have a great impact on the country&#39;s overall economy (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs.302-303).
The development of technology and improvements in production is another way to measure the development of a country. You can take the percentages of the workers employed in different sectors of the economy. A less developed country has a high percentage of workers in the food production sector. A more developed country has a high percentage of workers employed in the technology and service industries. Also, a person&#39;s access to different modes of transportation and different forms of communication is another way of assessing the development of a country using technology (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 304).
The development of social welfare is another way to measure the development of a country. Dependency ratios are common ways to measure the development of social welfare in a country. A dependency ratio is a measure of the number of dependents that each 100 employed people must support. Usually, the lower the dependency ratio, the less economic and social strain there is. Some other methods of measuring the development of social welfare in a country are literacy rate, life expectancy, infant mortality, and amount of savings per capita (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 304).
Walt Rostow&#39;s Ladder of Development model, also called the modernization model, shows the steps of development in countries. His model has to assume that all countries develop the same. There are five stages of development in this model. The first stage is called traditional. The main activity in countries at this stage is subsistence farming. These countries have a rigid social structure. The people of the country often refuse technological change. The second stage is called preconditions of takeoff. In this stage, there is a new leadership that moves the country towards diversity and flexibility. It prepares the country for the next stage. The third stage is called takeoff. During this stage, the country goes through something similar to an industrial revolution. Urbanization and industrialization start to occur. Improvements in technology and productions start to happen. The economy then enters the fourth stage called drive to maturity. During this stage, modernization starts to spark in important parts of the country. New technologies begin to diffuse, and industrial specialization starts up throughout the nation. Also, the population growth rate starts to slow. Only some countries reach the fifth stage. This stage is characterized by higher worker incomes and a widespread production of goods and services. The service industry develops greatly. Much of the country&#39;s workforce will be concentrated in the service sector. Rostow&#39;s model has received criticisms just like other development models. The problem with his model is it doesn&#39;t provide any context to development (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 305).

Development and Geography
Development happens in context. Context is using various scales to tell what is happening to a country and then combining those scales. To understand why the wealthiness of a country is different than the wealthiness of another, you have to look at not only at it from a state scale, but also from local, regional, and global scales too. Today, many scholars argue that poorer countries are going through neo-colonialism. Neo-colonialism happens when major world powers control the economies of less developed and poorer countries, even though the poorer countries are independent states. Development scholars have produced a number amount of theories called structuralist theories. A structuralist theory explains that economic inequality was built into the world economy. The dependency theory was created by structuralists. It states that political and economical relationships between countries and regions control and limit the development possibilities for poorer countries or regions. An example of this is colonialism. Colonialism created political and economical structures that made the colonies become dependent on the colonial power. This dependency helps sustain the regions with more prosperity and poverty in other regions. This can still happen after decolonization occurs (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 305-308).
Immanuel Wallerstein&#39;s world-systems theory states that the social changes in the developing world are directly related to the economic activities of the developed world. Wallerstein divided the world economy into the three-tier structure. This consists of the core, periphery, and semi-periphery. Core processes are processes that generate wealth in a place. This is because these processes require greater technologies, higher levels of education, and higher salaries. When core processes are put in a certain place, it brings in wealth for the people of the community. Periphery processes are the opposite of core processes because require little education, lower technologies, and lower salaries. Core regions are regions that have reached high levels of socioeconomic prosperity. These regions are big players in the global economic game. Periphery regions are poor the depend greatly on the core. They do not have much control over their economical or political affairs. Semi-periphery combines both core and periphery processes. Places of semi-periphery act as a buffer between the core and periphery in the world economy. Semi-periphery countries have more power than periphery regions; however, core regions still have a large influence on semi-periphery countries.

The Barriers and Costs of Economic Development
The world economic system is a problem for peripheral countries, but it is not the only problem. There are other barriers they face that slow them from developing economically. These barriers are low levels of social welfare, foreign debt, political instability, and the widespread disease. Peripheral countries face social problems that make economic development hard to accomplish. From a demographic perspective, peripheral countries have high birth and death rates with a low life expectancy. In fact, over half the population in peripheral countries is either 15 or younger. This is a problem because there are less adult laborers and more dependents. The low life expectancy and high infant mortality rates come from not having adequate nutrition. Lack of education is also a big problem. Many school-aged children do not attend school because everyone has to pay to send their children to school, even the poor. Peripheral countries have some of the highest illiteracy rates in the world. Usually, boys attend school longer than girls. Trafficking is when adults and children are manipulated into working under conditions that they would normally not choose. These adults and children are often seeking a better life when they get manipulated into trafficking. Trafficking is not considered slavery because no one is being sold (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 309-310).
Foreign debt is a big problem for peripheral countries. International financial institutions lend money to newly independent countries in the 1960s. Private banks and lending firms in the United States, Europe, and Japan recently started to lend peripheral countries money. Starting in the 1980s, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund started to loan very large amounts of money to peripheral countries for the purpose of development. These loans were given out in exchange for reforms in the county&#39;s economy or government, such as reducing tariffs and opening the country to foreign trade. These loans were called structural adjustment loans. Both the IMF and the World Bank required the countries they loaned money to to make structural adjustments in exchange for the loans. Now the peripheral countries owed money to these organizations. When a peripheral country spends a large portion of its budget on debt repayments, it has less money to spend of the development of the country. Many countries&#39; debts (including interest) are more than their revenues. This created a debt crisis for the poorest countries in the world (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 310-311).
Political instability is a very common problem within peripheral countries. Political instability in these countries is a result of the competition between the wealthy for control of the government and the disenfranchisement of the poor. It is hard for peripheral countries to maintain political stability. This is because their democratic governments failed, and most were taken over by military coups. Many countries have gone back and forth between a democratic government to a military government. Experts say it is a democratic government cannot be maintained without wealth. Politicians usually become corrupt in areas where there is much poverty. When a government becomes corrupt, they cut off the development aid to country by spending the money for other reasons that do not help the country. Core countries and other nongovernmental organizations try to help the country when this happens, but it is usually never enough to meet the basic need. Many corrupt government leaders stay in power for decades because the people are intimidated by the leader and the leader&#39;s followers. Those that do speak out against leader are often either killed or harmed by the government. The countries that do manage to overthrow their dictator have a long road ahead of them to getting their country back on track (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 311-312).
Diseases are very common in peripheral countries. Diseases directly affect the development of the countrys economy by weakening the labor force and making survival a challenge. Vectored diseases are diseases that start with one host and get spread to other hosts. Vectored diseases infect many people in the periphery. These infectious diseases spread quickly throughout host populations infecting more people each day. Malaria is a very common vectored disease in the periphery. Malaria is a disease carried by mosquitoes. This disease is caused by a parasite in the mosquitoes&#39; saliva. Every year, 2 to 3 million people die from malaria, most of them being under the age of 5. Malaria is all over the world,especially in sub-Saharan Africa, China, Southeast Asia, the tropical Americas, and in India. Other species of monkeys, rats, snakes, and birds can be infected with malaria. There are anti-malaria drugs on the market, but in order to stop it, the mosquitoes must be eliminated. The government of Sri Lanka, formerly known as Ceylon, launched a huge attack on mosquitoes in the 1940s using a pesticide called dichloro diphenyl trichloroethane, or DDT. The mosquitoes were almost wiped out, and the number of deaths associated with malaria significantly went down. DDT turned out to cause health and environmental problems, so it went out of use. Today there is a new tactic to fighting malaria. Special engineered mosquitoes are being released into the wild. These mosquitoes are genetically modified so that they can not transmit this disease anymore. The purpose of these mosquitoes is to see the number of mosquitoes that are not genetically modified decrease sharply. Also, in efforts to stop malaria, many programs have started to distribute mosquito nets so people are protected when they sleep at night (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 312-315).
Economic development is great for a country. However, there are still costs associated with economic development. This does not mean costs in money but more along the lines of physical costs. The three main areas of economic development that have costs associated with them. They are industrialization, agriculture, and tourism. The governments of many peripheral countries have set up special zones that focus on exporting called export processing zones, or EPZs. These EPZs offer favorable trade agreements, tax, and regulatory to foreign businesses. The two best known EPZs are the Mexican maquiladoras and the special economic zones in China. These zones are put near places that have easy access to export markets. The maquiladora zone is directly across from the United States-Mexico border. The special economic zones are located near ports. These zones attract a variety of manufacturing operations. The Mexican government designated the northern region of Mexico as the site for the maquiladora. They used this region so that the manufactured goods could be sent into the United States free of import tariffs. The maquiladora process began in the 1960s. It did not really take off until the 1980s. The wages were much lower in Mexico, so American manufacturing businesses began to relocate to the maquiladora region of Mexico. Today there are about 2000 manufacturing plants in this region. Over 600,000 people are employed by these plants. About 20% of Mexicos industrial labor force was concentrated in the maquiladora region. Many environmental regulations are not followed resulting in air and water pollution in that region. In 1992, the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA, between the United States, Canada, and Mexico. NAFTA facilitated the movement of manufacturing plants and service industries to Mexico. The two districts where the new plants are located are Tijuana under San Diego and Ciudad Juarez across from El Paso, Texas (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 315).
Agriculture in peripheral countries can either mean personal consumption or large scale production for a large agricultural company. Agriculture has modernized in these countries for the large scale production for the foreign market. This does not make a large impact for the surrounding areas. The distribution systems are usually poorly organized so not much food is grown for the local market. The land owned by the local population is usually fragmented, or divided into small plot of land that makes it challenging to farm efficiently on. Most farmers have outdated equipment and tools that are very inefficient. The crops that are usually grown are grain and roots. This is because these crops produce a high yield. Fertilizers are luxuries that cannot be afforded. Also, the farmers know little about soil conservation. The common result of this is soil erosion. Countries that face severe soil erosion and have dry climates next to deserts are at high risk of desertification, or the process of desert expansion into farming lands. Desertification has hit Africa very hard. Most of the African continent is arid or semiarid. People have no choice but to farm in these conditions. Some farmers and ranchers have turned some of these arid lands and made them into lands that can be used for farming and ranching. These lands are generally used more intensively to increase agricultural productions. In the last 50 years, more than 270,000 miles of farming land have become part of the desert in sub-Saharan Africa. Humans are the main cause of the desertification. Soil exhaustion, overgrazing, woodcutting, and misuse have sped up this process in this region of the world (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 315-317).
Peripheral countries have become favorite tourist destinations among travelers for wealthier countries. Tourism has its ups and downs; however, the downs greatly outweigh the ups. Really, the only major upside to tourism is it is a source of revenue and employment to the country. The one of the downsides of tourism is the country has to invest in tourist attractions, hotels, and other infrastructure necessary for tourism. The materials used for building hotels and other tourist buildings takes away from building houses for the citizens of the country. The majority of the income that the country receives from hotels is from the tourists&#39; consumption of food, water, and electricity. Most of the money is reinvested in building other infrastructure, such as cruise ports and airports. The tourism industry pays its employees low wages. Most have to work more than one job just to support themselves and their families. Many locals resent the wealthier tourists in their poorer societies. Tourism can also change the cultural landscape of a place. Huge hotels stand over the poorer housing that the locals live in. Also, hotels serve many meals a day while children are starving and suffering from malnutrition down the street. Even though tourism has many downsides to it, the local communities still rely on the tourist industry as a source of income (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 317-319).

Uneven Development Within States
Poverty is not limited to the periphery. In fact, core countries have areas where people live in poverty and unemployment rates are high. These areas include Indian reservations, inner cities, rural towns, and regions hit by a natural disaster. The governments of countries have an influence in core processes. This affects if and how the country will produce wealth. In core countries, most of the farmers are well educated in agribusiness and plant and animal sciences. Farming in core countries has become a core process. For example, the dairy industry is very mechanized. Computers and other systems decide the amount of food a cow gets to eat. Extensive records are kept on the animals as well. This is all usually done through the use of bar codes. Also, governments can put quotas, or a limit on the number of a certain good that can be imported, on the number of products imported into the country. This is usually because they want the products made in their country to sell more than the same product made in a different country (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 319-322).
Capital cities are very important economically and politically to a country. A way to create wealth in a country is to place well-paying government jobs in the capital city. Also, capital cities are a countrys headquarters and serve as the seat of government. Capital cities are usually the most influential cities in a peripheral country. After gaining independence, many peripheral countries move their capital city away from where there was a large colonial presence. This is because they either want to create a city to reflect the common culture of the country, or they want to extend economic development towards the center of the country. Often times, a large corporation will move a city and build it up. This is usually because there is a resource the corporation needs. Also, it develops the city by practicing different corporate activities. An island of development is a city where economic development is concentrated. These cities are built up by either a government or a corporation. Many people migrate to these cities because they have more opportunities for work and a better life (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 322-324).
Nongovernmental organizations, or NGOs, are organizations, not run by a state or local government, that try to improve the lives of people who are in poverty. They are independently run, and most, if not all, are non-profit organizations. Every NGO has its own set of goals and missions. These groups can be based out of anything from churches to charities. One specific program founded by NGOs is called the microcredit program. This program gives out loans to poorer people to encourage them to start a small business. To get as many loans repaid as they can, these programs promise future lending to people who repay their loans or they have the women guarantee each others credit. Because of this, the repayment rate is at 98 percent (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 324-326).

The Industrial Revolution
The Industrial Revolution began in the late 1700s in Great Britain. The Industrial Revolution improved industrial technologies that transformed the process of manufacturing goods. It changed the way goods were produced in a society, and it changed the way people got a hold of food, shelter, and clothing. The foundation of the Industrial Revolution was technology. There were more than just industrial inventions; there were new social, economic, and political inventions. The Industrial Revolution did not happen over night; The diffusion of new ideas and techniques took decades. Before the Industrial Revolution, products were made in a person&#39;s home. This was known as the cottage industry. The invention of the steam engine, patented in 1769 by James Watt, was the most important to the development of factories. It helped transport goods so factories could be built farther away from where the goods were going (Rubenstein, 2005, pg. 341).
Manufacturing needed to be located next to coalfields and water ports. As a result of this, large urbanized areas developed next to the coalfields. The largest urbanized area was the Midlands of north-central England. In the first half of the 1800s, the Industrial Revolution diffused to mainland Europe. Manufacturing still had to be near coal fields and water ports. Many urbanized areas sprung up across Europe in the southern part of the North European Lowland. This area consisted of northern France, southern Belgium, central Germany, western Czech Republic, and central and southern parts of Poland. Manufacturing grew once the railroad was built. It moved to existing urban areas with large markets, such as London and Paris (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 365-367).

Location Theories and Industrial Location
Primary activities are activities that deal with extracting resources from the Earth. Secondary activities are activities that manufacture the resources that were extracted. Improvements in transportation have made secondary activities less dependent on the resource location. Secondary industries don&#39;t have to be located next to the primary activities because raw materials can be transported over long distances. Now, manufacturers have to find the right place to put their business. A location theory predicts where a business should be located. Models for the location of secondary industries have to assume that the manufacturer wants to maximize their profit and take variable costs into account, such as energy costs transportation expenses. Friction of distance is a key issue in trying to maximize advantages. Friction of distance is when time and cost increase when the distance increases. An example of this is a raw material being shipped across the country. The the cost of shipping the material will go up, but you can sell the product for a greater price to make a profit (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 367-368).
Alfred Weber, a German economic geographer, developed a model for the ideal location of a business. His model was called the Least Cost Theory. The Least Cost Theory finds the ideal location of a business by using three categories of costs that would minimize costs. These categories are transportation, labor, and agglomeration. The first category is transportation. The location had to result in the lowest possible cost of shipping raw materials to the manufacturing plant and the finished goods to the market. The second category is labor. Putting a business in an area where labor is cheap is ideal. If the business is put far from the resource location, the low cost of labor would make up for the transportation costs. The third category is agglomeration. Agglomeration is when many businesses are clustered in one area. This saves money because the equipment and furniture one company needs can be made by another company in the same area. The costs of transportation is greatly cut down (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 368).
Harold Hotelling created the locational interdependence model. It states that two business competitors will try to take away from each other&#39;s territories in order to maximize sales. This would eventually result the two businesses selling their products across from each other. To explain this, Hotelling used two ice cream vendors selling ice cream on a beach. They both start by selling at opposite ends of the beach. After a while, both vendors try to maximize their sales by moving closer to the customers at the middle of the beach. Eventually, these vendors end up selling across from each other. The whole point of Hotelling&#39;s analysis was to show that the location of a business cannot be fully understood until it is referenced with the location of other businesses just like it (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 368).
In 1967, August Lsch wanted to determine the where the best sites for building manufacturing plants were in order to maximize profit. He added the influence of consumer demands and production costs to his calculations. Businesses usually locate themselves in an area where the can make a profit. This is how Lsch&#39;s model works. He said the ideal place for a manufacturing plant would be in an area where production and transportation costs were low and income is high (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 369).
Before 1950, manufacturing plants were next to the raw materials and transportation routes. There was only a small number of major industrial economies. There are four primary industrial regions. These include Western and Central Europe, Eastern North America, Russia and Ukraine, and Eastern Asia. In Western and Central Europe, Germany was and still is a major industrial power. There are three manufacturing districts in Germany: the Rhr, the Saxony district, and Silesia. The Rhr was a great industrial area in Europe. This district has many advantages to it. Since it is located near the Rhine River, it has good accessibility, and it is close to other markets. In the 1930s, the Rhr became one of the most important industrial regions in the world. The Rhr specialized in heavy manufacturing. Saxony specialized in lighter manufacturing. It was known for manufacturing textiles, ceramics, and optical equipment. Silesia was originally part of Germany, but it is now located in Poland and the Czech Republic. This region is based on the coal resources found in the region (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 369-370).
Europe had a serious rival at the beginning of the 20th century: North America. Manufacturing in North America started in the New England region of the northeastern United States. Because this region is not rich in natural resources, they have to be imported from other countries. One resource that does not have to be imported is coal. North America has very large coal reserves. These reserves are some of the largest reserves on Earth. Coal is distributed all over the country. There are steel plants built by the sea because there is a lot of iron ore that is imported here from other countries. After World War I, the United States rose as an industrial super power. Even after the Stock Market Crash in1929, the United States was still the dominate industrial power. Canada was also an industrial power. The American Manufacturing Belt is located in the northeastern region of the United States and a small portion of the southeastern region of Canada. The New England region and New York specialize in light manufacturing. The Southeast Pennsylvania district is located in this manufacturing belt. Iron ore was smelted in this district for a much of the 20th century. Early industrialization began in New York. This area contains tens of thousands of industrial establishments. New York is has a very large and important market, but like Paris and London, it does not have natural resource reserves. One of the world&#39;s greatest ports is located here. This port is a major break-of-bulk point. A break-of-bulk point is a place where cargo from on form of transportation is moved to another form of transportation. The Upstate New York district is farther east than the New York district. In the early 19th century, the Erie Canal was dug in order of connecting the East Coast and the Great Lakes. This caused population growth in this area. There are many specialty manufacturers here. For example, in Buffalo produces steel and Rochester produces cameras and other optical equipment. The Southern Ontario district serves as a linking point between Detroit and Buffalo. The area around Montreal near the St. Lawrence River is part of the Canadian industrial zone. This area is no where as big or as industrialized as the Ontario district, but it has one advantage over it. It gets cheap hydroelectric power. Paper-making and aluminum-refining industries are concentrated in the Montreal region. The industrial heartland of the United States includes the Pittsburgh-Cleavland area, the Detroit-southeast Michigan area, the Chicago-Gar-Milwaukee area, and smaller areas surrounding these larger areas. Here, iron ore and coal factories were replaced with factories that produced things like bulldozers, tanks, and harvesters (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 370-374).
In the former Soviet Union, Moscow had an important market, converging trade routes, a large labor force, and strong centrality. Before heavy manufacturing was added in, there was already light manufacturing taking place in the area. The Soviet Union contained a vast amount of raw materials. These raw materials include metallic ores (copper, iron, nickel, chromite, bauxite), coal, timber, and water. One of Russia&#39;s oldest manufacturing centers is St. Petersburg and its surrounding areas. It was the capital of the country during the time of the Tsar Peter the Great. Medical equipment, optical products, and high-quality machines were manufactured here. During World War II, many factories were disassembled and moved to the Volga River area located in moder day Southwestern Russia. This area is now one of Russia&#39;s most dominant industrial regions because of the movement of factories and industries during the war. During the last few decades of the 19th century, Ukraine and surrounding areas started to industrialize. After World War I, Ukraine was annexed by the former Soviet Union. The Soviets used the rich raw materials and industrial potential from Ukraine to rise as an industrial superpower during the mid-twentieth century (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 374).
China and Japan were the only Asian countries that underwent large-scale industrialization. Out of these two countries, Japan&#39;s industrialization started first. Japan became a leading industrial country less than a century after the Industrial Revolution took place. Japan&#39;s economy was built on government policies about industrialization and capital from colonization. Economic development in Japan started in the second half of the 19th century. Soon there were Japanese colonies in Korea, Taiwan, and mainland China. At the end of World War II, the Japanese economy was hit hardly; however after a few decades, Japan rose to be an economic superpower. The Kanto Plain is Japan&#39;s main industrial region. It is home to one-third of the Japanese population as well as the capital city of Tokyo. This region contains a harbor, and it is central to the whole country. Many businesses moved their headquarters to Tokyo. This region produces more than 20% of the country&#39;s total output. After Japan lost its colonies after World War II, the country&#39;s industries continued to prosper. This was because of Japan&#39;s highly skilled work force. Japanese products were all over the global market. Eventually, this all led to higher prices and wages. The search for countries where cheap labor could be found had started (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 374-377).

Changes in Industrial Production
New innovations in the production process triggered a manufacturing boom in the 20th century. One of the more significant of these innovations was the mass-production assembly line invented by Henry Ford. The assembly line allowed for the mass-production of goods in a single place. Ford&#39;s idea was called the Fordist system. Fordist was basically a way of organizing labor and production. Many countries and corporations supported each other under the Fordist system. Today, the world economy follows a post-Fordist system. This system includes production practices that where the goods are not mass produced. Production is mainly outsourced to different countries around the world. Time-space compression is the idea that many regions of the world are more connected through different communication and transportation technologies. Fluctuations in one economy can affect another around the world in a few minutes. When regions of the world were more connected, goods were produced closer to where the demand was. Now, goods can be produced anywhere in the world and can be transported to where the demand is. Just-in-time delivery is when goods can be transported to corporations around the world when they are needed. This creates a global division of labor, or when corporations hire workers form all over the world. The global division of labor has changed the role of different economic sectors within a country&#39;s economy. For example, the agricultural industry has become very mechanized and very efficient. Also, many manufacturing companies have moved to semi-peripheral or peripheral countries. This results in core countries having a large labor force concentrated in the tertiary sector of the economy (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 377-378).
During the post-Fordist era, there were new influences on the location of industries besides low wages. They are intermodal transportation, regional and world trade agreements, and the availability of energy. Efficient modes if transportation allow manufacturers to purchase raw materials from a great distance and transport finished goods across a great distance. An intermodal connection is a location where two or more modes of transportation meet up. This reduces the cost of transportation as well as makes it easier to ship goods. The container system is a revolutionary invention in the transportation sector. It allows for goods to be shipped in large, metal containers. These containers can fit on many forms of transportation, such as cargo ships, trains, and trucks (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 379).
Trade organizations, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), have trade agreements that set up quotas for the location of production for imported goods. Many governments have done the same thing between other governments. Most governments belong to the World Trade Organization (WTO), which negotiates and regulates rules of trade among countries in the trade organization. The trade agreements made by the WTO work to push the world into free trade. Most of the regional trade agreements try to do away with the quotas and tariffs between these member countries. Regardless of if it&#39;s a regional or a global trade agreement, it will affect what is produced in the area and the location of the production (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 379).
Coal was once the main power source of manufacturing plants. In the middle of the 20th century, oil and natural gas started to take over. Many countries depended on foreign oil and natural gas. Manufacturing plants have always been near the energy source that powers them. During the Industrial Revolution, many factories were built near coal fields for easy transportation of the coal. Oil and natural gas changed the concept of being located next to the an energy source. Oil and natural gas are distributed worldwide through pipelines and tankers. The new important aspect of energy sources is securing one. This is a national priority for most countries. The United States consumes 27% of the world&#39;s total amount of petroleum, and the United States consumes 37% of the world&#39;s total amount of natural gas. In 2001, the US need a minimum of 20 million barrels of oil a day to power the manufacturing plants and modes of transportation in the country. Like petroleum, the United States consumes and produces a large amount of natural gas. There is more than 2.5 million miles of pipelines in between the United States (including Alaska) and Canada (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 379-380).

Modern Manufacturing Belts
Many manufacturing regions have gone through deindustrialization in the last 20 years. Deindustrialization is a process in which corporates move out of one region and into another region that has cheap labor. This results in a period of unemployment in the deindustrialized region. The regions where the corporations move to become the new manufacturing regions. Many areas in Europe and in the United States are deindustrialized. These areas were beat out by other regions in the world that had cheaper labor. The northeastern region of the United States is sometimes called the Rust Belt because of the abandoned factories (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 381).
Most of China&#39;s industrial growth occurred under communist rule. One of the goals of China&#39;s communist government was to transform and develop the country&#39;s resources and industries when they took over in 1949. China is a very large country land mass wise. There are many coal deposits that are easy to reach because they are right under the surface of the ground. The coal is also good quality. New iron ore deposits are also being discovered. Many new industrial regions were created in China by the communist government. The Northeast district, also called Dongbei in China, became the industrial heartland of China. Heavy manufacturing is based in this district. It is located in the Liao River Basin. There is steel production to the south of the district, and there is lighter manufacturing, such as textiles, to the north of the district. The Shanghai and the Chang District is the second largest industrial region in China. It is built around the city of Shanghai, which is China&#39;s biggest city. Many different products are manufactured here, such as railroad cars, books, food, and ships. This district is described as the pacesetter for China&#39;s industrial growth. China has an enormous labor force and low wages. These two factors greatly attract businesses to the country. The Northeastern part of China is China&#39;s Rust Belt. Many state-owned factories have been either sold or closed. High unemployment rates are found here, and economic growth has ceased. However, this region is expected to recover because of its resources and geography. Many countries have outsourced to China. This means they have moved their businesses there and resume production in a different country. When this outsourced work is moved off the shore of the country, it is called offshore. Much of the outsourced work in China has started to move into the interior of the country (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 381-382).

Service Industries
In the 1970s, many factors led to inflation rates and financial instability in the global economy. Some of these factors are large growth in governmental activity, a rise in labor activism, and the costs of communication and transportation decreased. These factors challenged the Fordist system. In order for core regions to sustain a competitions advantage over other regions, they had to undergo significant readjustments. These readjustments would lead the core regions into the service industry. A service industry is also called a tertiary industry. These industries perform a service; they do not create a tangible product. Service industries are broken up into two divisions: quaternary and quinary industries. Quaternary industries collect, process, and manipulate capital and information. These industries include legal services, finance, insurance, and computer services. Quinary industries involve important decision making and advancements in human capacity. These industries include scientific research and higher level management jobs. Service industries are not the only aspect of the changing global economy. Other aspects include increased mechanization of production (mainly in the core), the growth of major multinational corporations, and the dispersing of the production process (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 383).
Many industrial regions across the world have started to deindustrialize into service industries. The most successful countries happened to be the wealthier countries. This means that the core is starting to transition into a service economy. Even though the core has less manufacturing than the periphery, the core industrial regions still dominate the periphery&#39;s industrial regions. In fact, 75% of the world&#39;s total amount of manufacturing comes from North America, western Russia and Ukraine, Eastern Asia, and Western Europe. The Sun Belt is the southeastern region of the United States all the way to the southwestern region of the United States. Many companies have settled in this long stretch of land because of the warm climate and the local laws. This resulted in population and economic growth in the Sun Belt. The eastern part of the Sun Belt is mainly secondary, or manufacturing, industries (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pg. 384).
The factors that determine the location of a service industry differ from those that determine the location of a manufacturing plant. The easiest way to look at these factors is to talk about each of the following separate: tertiary, quaternary, and quinary. The most important factors for the location of tertiary industries is the location in relation to consumers. The business will not do well if it is too far away from the consumers. For quaternary industries, there are different factors because this category is more diverse. Retail banks and other administrative services are usually located near their clients because they require a high amount of in-person contact. Man other industries set up where ever they can as long as they have access to telecommunications and digital processing technologies. In the quinary sector, thee industries are usually located near areas where quinary activities occur. Because of the vast amount of scientific research being done at universities, many quinary activities are located near these schools (de Blij, Murphy, & Fouberg, 2007, pgs. 384-386).

Unit 7- Cities and Urban Land Use

Why Cities?
Across the globe, more people are living in urban cities and towns than rural areas. A city is an area of people and buildings clustered and grouped together that act as a unit for a center of politics, culture, and economics. The majority of the world population is indeed urban. An urban area includes the central city area, as well as the suburban realm. In other words, an urban area is the city and its surrounding environs connected to the city. The rise of urbanization shows how the economy of the world is shifting from localized agriculture to the globalization of businesses. The change in urbanization also shows how easy it is to move in the modern, globalized world. Without long journeys on foot or deadly sailing trips to worry about, it has become quite simple to drop everything and move.
"Human communities have existed for over 100,000 years, but more than 90,000 years passed before people began to cluster in towns" (De Blij, Murphy & Fouberg, 2007, p. 260). This quote shows that urbanization is actually a recent affair. Cities today model the modern size and structure of urban areas from the past 200 years. Before people actually began living in cities though, they had to switch from hunting and gathering to agriculture. When people began to plant crops, they would have to stay with their fields in order to reap the harvest. One of the first forms of cities were agriculture villages , which were small villages that were based on agriculture. Because of this, the people had to live on just enough to get by, or near subsistence levels. The homes in agriculture villages were about the same size with same number of possessions. These villages showed egalitarian nature, which just means that goods were shared equally among the people. Two components that enabled the formation of cities were agricultural surplus and social stratification which work hand in hand. Agriculture surplus is, in simple terms, extra crop yield that is more than what the farmer and their family needs. The surplus can be sold for a profit. Social stratification is the separation of a population into classes. Which class a person is a part of depends on factors such as wealth, power, production, and prestige. Of course, not all cities are agriculture based. "In citiees, people generate personal material wealth, trade over long distances, live in stratified classes that are usually reflected in the housing, and engage in a diversity of economic activities- not just agriculture" (De Blij et al., 2007, p. 261). This means that the innovation of the city was really the first urban revolution.

The 5 Hearths of Urbanization
A hearth is a point at which diffusion explodes outwards. Human geographers have defined five hearths as the basis of urbanization expansion. These hearths are Mesopotamia, the Nile River Valley, the Indus River Valley, the confluence of the Huang He and Wei River Valleys, and Mesoamerica. Each hearth has its own characteristics and traits that make it such a leader in urbanization.
Mesopotamia is the first hearth. It is located in an area of Southwest Asia called the Fertile Crescent. This hearth includes all the great cities between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. Mesopotamia exhibited social inequality, which meant that there was a separation between the upper and lower classes. The urban elite built walls around their palaces and hired artists to decorate their homes. The people of Mesopotamia created a priest-king class, which supported religious leaders, along with a religious-political ideology to support them. This meant that the rulers were in charge of both religion and government. These individuals had tasks like levying taxes and collecting part of the harvest presented by agricultural workers. Opposite of the urban elite were the ordinary citizens. Typical homes were packed together like mud-walled sardines, the only thing separating one from its neighbor was a narrow lane. These were better than the huts of poor citizens, smeared with mud and reeds. Workshops lined the roads, mud walls surrounded the city, and in the middle was an early type of CBD filled with houses and shrines. Temples were large buildings and were built on mounds of dirt over 100 feet high. There was a complete lack of sanitation, so disease was a major cause of death.
The Nile River Valley is the second hearth of urbanization that began around 3200 BC. Interestingly, archeologists debate whether the Nile River Valley is truly a hearth, or if it&#39;s just diffusion from Mesopotamia. It would appear as if the agricultural techniques and methods diffused from Mesopotamia. However, there is evidence that supports independent urbanization in this area. The introduction of irrigation made this hearth unique from the rest. There was also an absence of walls around the city. The Nile River Valley had singular control, where the power coincided with control of the irrigation system. In addition to the normal architecture, there were also the great pyramids, tombs, and the sphinx, all which were built by slaves.

The Hearths of Urbanization cont.
The third hearth of urbanization is the Indus River Valley, and like the Nile River Valley, it seems as if it diffused from Mesopotamia. However, this hearth is unique in its intricate city plans. The hearth originated in 2200 BC. Just like the Nile River Valley, it is likely that the agriculture in the third hearth diffused from the Fertile Crescent. Scholars have found ancient Indus writings, but have not been able to decipher them yet. The first cities of this hearth were Harappa and Moheenjo-Daro, whose city structure suggests that the third hearth had a leadership class. All homes had access to the same infrastructure, such as wastewater drains and wells. Thick walls surrounded the cities, where scholars believe that there was a lot of trade due to coins discovered around gateways in the Mediterranean.
The fourth hearth of urbanization arouse around the Huang He and Wei River Valleys and dates back to 1500 BC. The center of the city was a vertical structure centrally located within the city. The structure had an inner wall built around it, which surrounded temples and palaces for the leadership class. Located near China, this urbanization hearth was in charge of the building of the Great Wall of China around 200 BC. This hearth was also responsible for the creation of the legendary 7,000 Terracotta Warriors of China.
The final hearth of urbanization is Mesoamerica. Mesoamerican cities were all focused on religion, meaning they were theocratic. The rulers had divine right, virtually making them God-kings. Such cities included Yucatan, Guatemala, and Honduras.

The Hearths of Urbanization cont.
Ancient Cities were the centers of religion, power, and the economy. The cities were the main portals for trade, where wealthy merchants, land/livestock owners, and traders operated. Education came from teachers and philosophers that lived in the ancient cities. Handicraft industries were valued high in the communities, and they served as magnets for the best craftspeople and inventors. Ancient cities played an important role in cultures and societies around the world. Being the centers of most religion, trade, education, and travel, ancient cities attracted a variety of travelers, tradesmen, priests, and pilgrims. However rural villages had different city landscapes than towns and cities. Cities had structures to hold travelers, like hotels and inns, prepare food for sale, collect raw materials, hold worship celebrations, and house soldiers. However, compared to modern cities, these ancient cities were not very large. Many of the urban hearths did probably reach their maximum population and sustainable size. Factors that affect sustainability include the production, gathering, and distribution of food, as well as social organization. The urban hearths were rare exceptions in an extremely agricultural dominant society.

Greece and Rome
You can see evidence of Ancient Greece and Rome everywhere you look. The influence of the two empires has been exponential. Each country does have its own characteristics, though. First, take a look at Greece.
By 500 BC, Greece was one of the most urbanized countries in the world, which brought a rush of urbanized cities. In fact, the city of Knossos was the true cornerstone of the Minoan civilization. Athens and Sparta were the main Greek cities, and at the time, Athens was the largest city in the world. Like cities from the 5 urban hearths, the Greeks would place their most important buildings on high points. Unlike the others, though, Greeks didn&#39;t build the mounds, but used natural elevations. The most impressive building in Greece was built on the highest point, called the Acropolis. The architecture techniques of the Greeks have been copied numerous times throughout history. Another focal point of Greece was the Agora, the market place of the country. There was a plentiful amount of trade routes between Greece and other cities, as well as between the Greek islands. Entertainment took place in large theaters, where plays and other events were held. There were still poor living conditions, however. Though Greece wasn&#39;t an urbanization hearth, the country still had a global impact. In fact Roman culture and urbanization diffused from Greece.
Rome had an extremely large urban system, which required much thought for the placement. Rome had regional planners who were exceptional at choosing the site of Roman cities. The site is the absolute location that is an optimum location for trade, defense, and religion. Regarding the religion, Roman mythology is almost completely based off of Greek figures. You can see the similarities from the other country in Rome&#39;s city structure; Romans had a rectangular street grid pattern, and instead of an acropolis and agora, Rome had the forum. Entertainment took place in the Colosseum, where competitions, war games, ceremonies, and other public events were held. Often Gladiators ad Christians were thrown into the Colosseum to fight to death for entertainment. Romans were both rich and poor, and slavery was a very large part of society. 1-2 out of every 3 Roman citizen was a slave.

The Second Urban Revolution
To recap, the first urban revolution was the formation of cities. This included the five hearths of urbanization, as well as some other prominent ancient cities. The second urban revolution directly coincided with the industrial revolution. Cities had to adapt to the sudden rush of incoming citizens. But before industrialization could have another revolution, there had to be an increase in food production. This happened thanks to a series of agriculture innovations including the seed drill, hybrid seeds, and improved breeding practices. When the workers no longer were required to be at the fields, they were free to move to the cities to find work. A key factor for creating an industrial city was proximity to a power source. Nearness to water was also important for some cities, such as mercantile cities. Others required to neighbor coal and oil fields.
Unfortunately, when cities began to industrialize, there was a complete lack of regulation. Slums, failed sewage systems, pollution, all of these were prominent issues arising with industrialization. Living conditions were bad, but working conditions were even worse. With no child labor laws yet in place, children were forced to work dangerous jobs for long hours with a pay of next to nothing. Finally, in the second half of the twentieth century, things started to turn around. Factories were repositioned, and cities moved the manufacturing companies away from nice living areas. Overtime, factories were abandoned, only ghosts of industrialization remaining in rust belts? around the world. However, the urbanization brought about by the industrialization of cities is still present today.

The Placement of Cities
Cities around the world are located where they are for specific reasons and multiple factors. Urban geographers are always searching for these reasons, and they use many techniques. Using quantitative data, urban geographers sometimes look at the trade area of a city. The trade area is simply the region where a city has a dominant influence. Two other factors that affect a city&#39;s location are population and distance. Urban geographers have made conclusions about different sized cities called the rank-size rule. This rule states that the largest city in an area has the largest trade area due to the most transportation. Medium-sized cities trade in smaller areas of commerce and are scattered from the major city. Small towns house the grocery stores and other necessities. The smallest villages may have a small shop or gas station. A hierarchy forms based on population and trade area. The rank-size rule also states that the population of a city is inversely proportional to its hierarchical rank. The rank-size rule is not always present in countries that have a city that is much larger than the rest, like Paris or Mexico City. This rule doesn&#39;t state the location or placement of cities, though.
The central place theory was created by Walter Christaller. This model predicts how and where central places in the urban hierarchy (cities to villages) would be distributed based on their function and placement. The model is based on a few assumptions. The first is that the surface of the ideal region would be flat with no physical barriers, such as mountains or rivers. Secondly, that the soil fertility would be universal, so agriculture could take place anywhere in the city. Third, population and purchasing power would be evenly distributed. Next, transportation would be uniform and be available from one region to the next. Finally, any good or service could be sold anywhere and in every direction out to a certain distance. The model is set up so the largest central place would provide the most functions to the majority of the region. His model isn&#39;t circular, but actually a collection of hexagons that fit perfectly together. You can see an example of Christaller&#39;s model in the Sunbelt phenomenon in southern regions. Henry Ford said, in regard to the central place theory, "[The central place theory can still add] analytical power to the understanding of patterns of urban growth, even in this era of fast and long-distance transportation, suburbanization, and multiple urban functions."
Each city model shows functional zonation, or the practical division of a city into zones based on their function. There are many zones that are important to understand before looking at any models. The Central Business District(CBD) is a concentration of businesses and commerce in the center of a city. A CBD is usually associated with high real estate values, skyscrapers and tall buildings, traffic, converging highways, and mass transit systems. Central city is a term to describe a strictly urban area that has no suburban traits. The central city is sometimes synonymous with the older part of a city versus the newer suburbs. A suburb describes a uniform part of an urban area that is usually adjacent to the city. Suburbs are generally residential, but you can find other features like schools, malls, and office parks as well. Suburbanization is the spread of cities into surrounding areas that were previously uninhabited. It is typically a transition from rural to urban.
There are three models for the North American city. The first is the concentric zone model, created by Ernest Burgess. His model divides the city into 5 concentric zones based on their function. The CBD is in the center, then the zone of transition. A zone of independent workers&#39; homes is third, surrounded by middle-class residents, and finally enclosed by the suburban ring. This model is dynamic, so as the city grows, the zones can change.
Homer Hoyt created the sector model in the late 1930s. This model focuses on residential patterns, explaining why the wealthy live where they do. The sector model is divided into pie slices, where each zone occupies a certain slice.
Chauncy Harris and Edward Ullman created the multiple nuclei model which was sort of a compromise between the sector and concentric zone models. This model shows the CBD is losing its dominancy as the main nucleus and proposes that suburban areas also have their own nuclei. However, even this model is said to be too simple for a modern city.
With the technology and transportation innovations, areas outside the cities began to grow, creating edge cities. An edge city is a small city on the outside of a large, influential city. These smaller cities attract suburbanites with workplaces, shopping, leisure activities, and other urban elements. This causes the ties between central cities to loosen. This created the term urban realm to describe the spatial components of the modern metropolis where each realm has a function. It&#39;s the best model to describe the most recent urbanization in America.
The Griffin-Ford model models the Latin American city structure. The model has a thriving CBD and other sectors coming out from it. The model also has disamenity sectors which are the very poorest parts of cities. In extreme cases, these areas are actually separate from the city services and are run by gangs and drug lords. These are known as barrios, or slums.
Since the beginning of the century, Africa has been the site of the lowest levels of urbanization in the world. The majority of the people living in Africa are farmers and the urbanization rates in some areas are less than 40%. There is a lot of diversity in African cities due to the influence of various European countries, therefore making it difficult to create an accurate model. African cities typically have 3 different CBDs, including a colonial, traditional, and market zone variation. There is evidence of vertical development in the colonial CBD. The traditional CBD includes single-story buildings with some traditional architecture. The market zone is an informal, open, forum-type market. However, it is still extremely important for their economy. There are traces of developing sectors defines ethnic and mixed neighborhoods. African cities are surrounded by a ring of squatter settlements.
The McGee model is the model for a typical Southeast Asian city. This part of Asia is the location for many populous cities, including Kuala Lumpur, Jakarta, and others. McGee&#39;s model puts the central point of the city as the old colonial port zone combined with a large commercial district surrounding it. There isn&#39;t a formal CBD, but parts of a CBD strewn around the city. The parts include the old colonial port, government, Western commercial, alien commercial, and the mixed land-use sections. This model also includes squatter areas, suburbs, and other zones

Creating a City
Cities are created by people and institutions. Social and cultural preferences affect where a city will be placed. These preferences also affect where people live. The cultural landscape of a city is unique for each one. Home styles, distance between streets, vegetation around the houses, and even space allotted for automobiles all make up the cultural landscape of a city.
There appears to be negative correlation regarding the population and prosperity of cities; as the population increases, the prosperity of the region decreases. Pull factors can contribute to this because people move to cities in search of a better life. Unfortunately, the cities cannot keep up with the incoming flow of immigrants, so the quality of the housing depletes. These cities develop shantytowns, which are unplanned developments of homes that aren&#39;t structurally sound, and are typically made of crap wood, iron, pieces of cardboard, etc. However, these poor conditions do not have any effect on the high rates of incoming populations. Higher quality cities enforce zoning laws which show the use of space that is acceptable for most of the community. The laws are based on cultural preferences and environmental regulations.
One way of making a city is to remodel a neighborhood. You could also change the layout of a current city to represent the modern goals and aesthetics. Redlining is the illegal trick used by realtors where redlines represent neighborhoods or areas that are sketchy. Banks would refuse to give loans to anyone living in these areas. The debt of the red-lined neighborhoods would spiral out of control. Another illegal realtor trick known as blockbusting was where a realtor would tell families that the neighborhood was to be a popular racial neighborhood. This would cause many families to sell their homes, which the realtors would sell back to the racial families for unfair prices. This practice is also illegal today. Commercialization, which is a perfectly legal practice can be seen in many urban areas. It is simply the practice of designing a central city that appeals to businesses and tourists. When people move back into these newly urbanized areas, it is known as gentrification. It is most common in areas with a tight housing market and defined central city neighborhoods. Tear downs is almost like a suburban gentrification. It occurs when people buy a house simply to tear it down and build a larger home on the land. The new, larger home is sometimes referred to as a McMansion.
Whenever an area goes through a sudden urbanization where homes, businesses, and roads are built with disregard for urban planning, it is known as urban sprawls. Urban sprawl is pretty universal, but it is especially present in the Sunbelt and the West where there is an incline in population size. To counteract this urban spread, architects have created a design called new urbanism. It is an idea that you can create an urban community with less traffic, cheaper homes, more jobs, and so much more. You can see this idea being put into place in cities like Seaside, Florida. Another type of community is a gated community. These are fenced in neighborhoods that have controlled access gates for residents. These appeal to a variety of people.

Ethnic Neighborhoods
A European ethnic neighborhood usually consists of immigrants from other colonies and countries. The colonies are usually ones that were once part of that country, such as Algerian neighborhoods in France. Alternately, Germany has different neighborhoods for ally countries, such as Turkey. The European government is extremely involved in the social rights of their people, which is slightly different from the US. Due to the age of Europe&#39;s cities, they are more suitable for walking rather than automobiles. A benefit to the cities&#39; age is the amount of historic tourist attractions. Housing and work locations are meshed together, where businesses will be on the bottom floor and rooms up above. However, zones of transition are home to unemployment, crime, resentment, and more. Whether a city has ethnic neighborhoods depends on the government, though.
In cities of periphery and semiperiphery, slums usually begin to form where the permanent buildings end. Sometimes they can surround the central city, almost smothering it. If you go to a city like this, you would see how the makeshift homes cover every foot, except for a few trees and narrow footpaths, in every direction. Slum areas consist of dangerous shelters, and the government doesn&#39;t have the resources to supply education, food, housing, or police. However, some settlements require rent for land that has recently been owned or used for farmland. Ethnic conflict often occurs between newcomers and people who have lived there for some time and are successful. Often present in shantytowns like these are informal economies that are free from taxes and do not contribute to the government&#39;s economy. Unfortunately, this is not good for the government or its economy. It might not be preferred, but the slums are a way of life.

Globalization
Globalization is the modern trend of everything interacting at a global scale. One thing that functions at this level is a world city. You can probably think of a few right off the bat: New York, London, and Tokyo are just a few. Some of the world cities are also primate cities for their country. These cities are kind of like generic representatives for the views and aesthetics of their country. Across the globe, the media is constantly creating spaces of consumption where viewers, readers, listeners, etc. can go to consume their products. A universal example is Walt Disney. Everyone has been to the park, watched the movies, read the books, or seen references on TV. Disney does this on purpose to create an entertainment space where you will be encouraged to invest in their products. This can be seen throughout hundreds of media outlets throughout the modern world.
